https://www.postcourier.com.pg/athletics-png-name-pacific-games-team/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Athletics PNG has selected a final team of 24 male and 11 female athletes for the Pacific Games in Honiara.President Tony Green said the team includes a few new athletes who performed well at the recent PNG Air National Championships in Port Moresby and whose inclusion is subject to the endorsement of the Justification Committee.Sprint Queen Toea Wisil took this year off for personal reasons and Leonie Beu will carry the hopes of PNG in the women’s sprints, which PNG has dominated in recent years.Beu has been in scintillating form this year, running 23.61 seconds in the 200m and 54.33 in the 400m.Green said the team was a little smaller than the 40+ that had been expected and the main reason for this was the difficulty finding and retaining female athletes all round, but especially for longer distance events.“This is a Pacific wide problem, but we have to maintain standards he said, and have selected a quality team made up only of athletes that meet the selection criteria which of course is principally focused on the ability to contribute to the medal tally.’PNG’s main Gold medal hopes will be Leonie Beu, Adrine Monagi (hurdles and relays) , Rellie Kaputin (Jumps) , Scholastica Herman and Mary Tenge (middle distance) , Sharon Toako (throws).The mens 100m and 200m will be wide open this year following the retirement of Banuve Tabakaucoro and Papua New Guinea cannot underestimate Samoa who have produced a lot of good sprinters in recent years and beat PNG in the 4*100m relay both in Saipan 2022 and at the last Pacific Games in Apia.Papua New Guinea does though have a strong track team this year with some exciting new talent coming through to join Leroy Kamau, Daniel Baul, Benjamin Aliel and Emmanuel Wanga. The fast-improving Adolf Kauba will focus on challenging the overwhelming favourite in the 800m, Alex Beddoes of Cook Islands and will be joined by Lot Samare and Robert Stringer.PNG will have a strong team in the mens distance events with reigning Pacific Games champion in the 3000m steeplechase Simbai Kaspar being joined by Mini Games medallists Siune Kagl, Aquila Turalom, Dilu Goiye and Israel Takap.However, with Solomon Islands having a strong tradition in the long-distance events they can be expected to rise to the occasion and be a serious threat in this event category.Five members of the NSI development programme made it into the team with Pais Wisil and Adolf Kauba being joined by Lot Samare.Sialis Passinghan (400m hurdles) and Javelin thrower Kenny Peter who threw a personal best 59.90m at the Nationals to go second on the PNG All Time best list behind National record holder Lakona Gerega. Multi eventer Karo Iga with Eldan Totil will carry PNG’s hopes in the mens jumps.The Athletics team is also expected to include ten para-athletes and a separate press release will cover this matter. In response to questions about medal chances.Green said that the team is in good shape and has prepared well, but a final camp where all the athletes will have good coaching support and some lead up competition is essential to get the athletes ready to perform at their best.Athletics PNG expects to retain its position as the #1 Pacific Island Nation at the Games, however the participation of Australia and New Zealand has the potential to impact the medal tally.Its not clear at this stage what level of athletes they will send.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/the-png-australia-connection/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PNG Prime Minister James Marape will make history when he addresses the Federal Parliament at the invitation of Prime Minister Anthony Albanese. Australians believe in tradition which they keep strenuously. History is also something we should all believe in to understand the future. In looking forward to the upcoming event, here’s some background stuff.The Independent State of Papua New Guinea is a Pacific Melanesian nation of eight million people. Other Melanesian States are the former British Solomon Isles, Vanuatu, formerly French New Hebrides, New Caledonia and Fiji.In the Pacific are also Micronesian and Polynesian nations. In terms of world map, Papua New Guinea lies at the tip of Australia’s Far North Cape York Peninsula facing the Equator. Papua New Guinea or PNG is Australia’s nearest neighbour, closer than the Muslim State of Indonesia with whom PNG shares a common land border.At the extreme western end of the island of New Guinea, it is only a 10-minute boat ride to the Australian islands of Boigu and Saibai in the Torres Strait. Due to their closeness to the PNG mainland; there are traditional border crossings which is tolerated by Australia, just as happens on the land border at Vanimo on the PNG side and the Indonesian province of Irian Jaya.Irian Jaya was annexed by the Dutch but on departure at the first half of the 20th Century, handed over the indigenous Melanesians to Indonesia. The New Guinea part of the island annexed by the Germans was ‘given up’ basically, just before full-scale hostilities broke out to start WWII in PNG.Australia then assumed control over New Guinea as part of its jurisdiction over the mandated Trust Territory of Papua. After WWII, the protectorate became the Territory of Papua-New Guinea. The mandate to Australia was arranged by Britain at the United Nations because Britain said it was too far away to keep an eye on Papua.Papua was initially a British Protectorate and when mandated to Australia became its territory. The United Nations (UN) came into being as a result of loss of life and damage to economies experienced during WWII, as well as the hangover of WWI. Leaders of nations desiring peace came together to broker peace and the UN was born.It was at this time that decolonisation started and PNG happened to be at the right place at the right time. What triggered the avalanche was the change in political boundaries in the aftermath of the two great wars.
DECOLONISATIONThe assumption of responsibility over New Guinea invariably helped Australia because it demonstrated Australia’s resolve, proved its tenacity and this led to federation when ‘big brother’ Britain saw that Australia was indeed capable. Australia, as a fledgling nation itself had meager resources to be able to look after a dependency. But the belief was that ‘New Guinea’ was a territory of Australia and this paved the way for the recognition Australia needed to become the influence it got to be.Responsibility over New Guinea invariably helped AustraliaThe effects of the two World Wars affected Australia badly and as decolonisation swept the globe, Australia also warmed to the concept of peace and saw decolonisation as a necessary step in that direction. There was something else that invariably came into play as a political justification for the hand moving toward decolonisation.In the Second World War, Australia, like most people of the European race tend to do, went to meet the enemy half way – not to allow the enemy to set foot on home soil as that would amount to an invasion. Australia, to the Japanese who proved their skill as jungle fighters in the China and Korean wars, was a relatively easy topography. To allow the Japanese to set foot in Australia would not only spell disaster but, also, whatever the outcome waited at the end, national pride and sovereignty were at stake. By taking the fight to the enemy resolved these issues and New Guinea being Australia’s property was the place to engage the enemy.
DEFENCE OF AUSTRALIAAustralia fought in New Guinea to defend itself first and second, its territory. Since New Guinea is at the corridor to Australia, it became a strategic defence point for Australian security. It still is. When Douglas MacArthur was General Officer Commanding the South – West Pacific Theatre of War, this was how the defence of Australia was largely seen also; to block the advance of the Japanese in New Guinea.What actually won the day for the Allied forces was their battle strategy. Australia would take care of the air assault and the infantry and the US; the navy. The naval blockade prevented Japanese reinforcements and supplies from getting through as well as stifled any chances of retreat and regrouping. The hastily-trained Australians who flew US -supplied airplanes paid a certain price. But apart from the mop-up operations, Australia will forever relish in its war effort, notably the Battles of Kokoda, Gona and Buna-Sananada, all in the Northern Province of PNG. There were other engagements but none are more closer to the heart of Australians than these three battles.Kokoda was not only a hell of a place to fight because of its unforgiving terrain but it was also the last line of defence before Port Moresby, after which, the Japanese, if they advanced that far, would have had Australia within their sight. This was where the Fuzzy-Wuzzy Angel legend was born, and is today, the proudly- shared heritage of PNG and Australia.
SHARED INDEPENDENCEPNG on its part lacks the ability to adequately protect its borders even though new legislation has come into place. It will need Australian assistance in that regard and it is in the mutual interest of both countries to remain good and effective neighbours, the basis of which is the common heritage they share.PNG is politically independent. Socially, well; once a home-grown economic model is devised and put in place, it may lead to a clearer definition of its national character, beliefs and value systems. Economically, advancement in this sector is contingent on the social institutions being developed because they are already a part of the scenario whether PNG is industrialised or not.The country’s economy is still under customary traditions and beliefs but the fact that PNG is already a player on the world stage with borders crashing and the world becoming one global village, there is need to look at the social institutions- viz a viz – The family, economy, government and law, education and religion. All five are interconnected and herein lies the chance of developing national character and establishing its belief and value systems.PNG’s national economy, however, cannot be isolated from the world. One of the biggest challenges facing PNG is the human capacity and education, especially tertiary education, needed to empower citizens to engage in building the nation’s social structure. The PNG government is very much aware of this as a way of lifting the quality of life of its people and is hinting on people capacity-building as the basis of its economy rather than a service-driven economy.
In the colonial era the question – in whose interest was the PNG economy being built – was asked; the Papua New Guineans or the people who risked their money there? Australians like Gough Whitlam, Kim Beazley, Sir Paul Hasluck and C E Barnes were bold men, well-meaning and adventurous in their diplomacy toward the question of PNG independence.
That question of long ago still lingers. But the reality is that the policy of a Minister is like the economist’s view – always juggling between ideas to come to an agreement while the influencing factors are relentlessly active in their own way. The layman’s view is that the market economy has a lot to say about that. But again, it depends on political correctness and the prevailing circumstances. All anyone on both side of the Torres Strait can do is to take a bow in humble gratitude.
HOME RULEHome rule for PNG began as an idea. The idea initially came from the Federal Opposition. The Federal Opposition Leader in 1970 was Gough Whitlam and championing the cause of self determination for PNG saw him become prime minister two years later when Labor came into power.Whitlam arrived in the Territory and commenced his two-week tour on New Year’s Day, 1970. In Port Moresby he had consultations with leading territory figures, visited the university and later had a long briefing with senior army men including the commander of the Papua-New Guinea Command, Brigadier-General Eldridge. Later he had talks with several Port Moresby businessmen and senior Banking officials.The Australian said in an editorial: “Mr Whitlam’s target dates for home rule and Independence in New Guinea have crystalised steadily between the Government and Opposition. The Labor policy highlights two facts of life which the government refuses to face. First, the decision on when New Guinea is to become independent is not one for New Guinea alone. The time may well come when Australian opinion is not prepared to pay the political price of gradualism.And second, that the time left for the transfer of power is, in any event, extremely short. Discussion of New Guinea, such as it is, is the politician’s tendencies to conduct it in terms of sublime altruism. Australia’s national interests are just as much involved in the Independence issue as New Guinea’s. Both the Government and Opposition tacitly recognise the fact even if they define the interests differently.A definite date for home rule is vital and there seems nothing wrong with Mr Whitlam’s suggestion of 1972. Full Independence will inevitably follow soon afterwards. Perhaps after two years’ experience, could indicate how soon. But what is so clearly needed before either of these steps is removal of the dead-hand remote control system in Canberra which deprives even the present administration of independence, authority and proper exemplary value. Until the Administration has visible power that can be handed over to the native peoples, Independence will remain a half-myth in New Guinea”.Kim Beazley, the Labor Member for Freemantle accompanied Whitlam on the Opposition Leader’s tour of the Territory. From his report which he gave to the Post Courier, the campaign for Independence in New Guinea was focused on what he called the gunboat diplomacy of the key players ‘at row boat speed’ and directed at the Government, it turned the tide in Whitlam’s favour. Here is an excerpt from that report by Mr Beazley.“Increasingly, Papua-New Guinea is being run for the foreign investor. And the certain signal of the restoration of this imperial technique is the restoration of the imperial technique – the punitive expedition.” Beazley pointed out that in 1969 a punitive expedition using batons and tear gas sought to force the Rorovanas to sell their land to CRA at a price satisfactory not to themselves but to the Administration. After the visit to Canberra of Bougainville leaders Paul Lapun, MHA (Member of House of Assembly) and Raphael Bele, to tackle the conscience of the Government, Prime Minister Gorton ordered the Administration and its punitive expedition out of the affair. The natives then negotiated for themselves a deal 20 times better than did the Administration, which alleged itself to be protecting their interest.“Another punitive expedition of 1000 police went to deal with Mataungan Association members among the Tolai of New Britain. Again, Mr Gorton reversed the policy of the Administration. The 11,000 Tolai addressed by Mr Whitlam were a manifestation of growing land pressure in the Gazelle. The Minister for Territories, Mr C E Barnes has been subject to severe press criticism. When he is led by his heart and conscience, he is a winner in policy and wins the heart of native leaders”. Beazley said he had seen Mr Barnes do it. “Led by the advice of the hard-eyed economic developer, however, his policy somehow always ended in violent clashes.The Hasluck policy of equal pay for equal qualification had been discarded. It was in fact an Australian promise repudiated. Defending his policy in the House of Representatives on September 30, 1959, Mr Hasluck said: ‘Anyone – if there is anyone – who still thinks of New Guinea people as a mass of cheap labour to work for his sole advantage, and without ambition or claims of their own, not only is living in a fool’s paradise, but is basically building a fool’s hell.”“In conflicts with the most advanced sections of the people we have twice come to violent clash – the fool’s hell. So far Mr Gorton has intervened to avert the worst twice. This caprice is symptomatic of the loss of policy coherence since Sir Paul left the Ministry.” (Hasluck became the Governor-General).Sir Paul, advising the House of Representatives said: “The Territory of Papua-New Guinea is developing economically and will in future develop faster. But the level of local saving in Papua-New Guinea is low and finance for the major development projects comes predominantly from outside the Territory. Because of this, the Administration has in the past acquired – for future disposal to the people of the Territory – substantial equity holdings in certain enterprises, notably the Bougainville copper project and the New Britain palm oil project.“My government now proposes to ask the Territory House for legislation to establish a statutory corporation to acquire equity in major investment projects in the Territory. This new institution will have a close link with the Papua – New Guinea Development Bank. My Government will this month introduce a new scheme to practical, down to earth training of Papuans and New Guineans in Australia, in areas of training not available in the Territory”.In outlining the Government’s program Sir Paul said that the Government did not believe that an arbitrary date for Independence should be set by it. Even against the wishes of the people it will not do so, he said. “But my Government does believe in constant advancement towards self-government”, Sir Paul said.
INDEPENDENCE IN CONTINUATIONWe’ve seen so far that independence for PNG is in continuation. There is no question about its sovereignty and the business of governing the people and managing the nation which are continuing with remarkable success in some areas. But until a safe mark is reached where PNG will completely stand on its own, Australia is very much a part of the political, economic and social landscape of its neighbour. The colonial past and the obligations there make this inevitable and if Australia were to look in disdain to PNG’s struggles, its reputation would suffer. It is not ‘interference,’ rather, it is national conscience. Independence for PNG means as much to Australia as does to PNG so ours is a shared independence.
It is safe that way as this condition acts as a catalyst for strong bilateral relations. It’s hard to imagine that Australian budgetary support will be reduced or cut off completely. The Australian taxpayers can speak at the polls and political parties in Australia are acutely accountable to the voter so the riches in the mineral and petroleum sector may give the impression that we in PNG are making inroads. We bring the Australian people back to our earlier point that PNG needs to build its capacity.
Tagged: Anthony Albanese, British Solomon Isles, Fiji, French New Hebrides, James Marape, Vanuatu 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-is-blessed/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
OPPORTUNITY is a big word. It knocks on your door if you are lucky. If you are unlucky, it will not knock on the door but will hang in the “AIR”…take it or leave it.
Choice is yours. Fact is. It comes only once. If you do not take it, it passes and evaporates and will not return in the form and shape it did.
PNG sits Geo-Politically blessed, now than it ever did. It has become a centre of attraction between Australia and China.
Stepping back in time, between December 7th 1941 until September 2nd 1945, another Asian country was engaged in a regional crusade to take control of the pacific and PNG became its entry and exit in that era.
Its desire was to compete with the industrialised nations of western Europe and the United States.
Other non-guilty but responsible nations mentioned by recorded history in the pacific crusade were Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, China, France and the Soviet Union.Caught with their pants down, was the unfortunate pacific people and the main landmass utilised during that crusade was PNG, a Colony during that “’patch of grass’’ era.
Seventy-eight years later, forty-eight of which as an Independent sovereign nation, the landmass known as PNG again sits as a bridge of another tussle, an economic tussle. 
PNG needed a shake to alert United Nations after the pacific tussle that the nation needed sovereignty so that the fuzzy wuzzy’s can take control of their own political destiny.
A champion political Knight appeared in his shining armour and pursued political independence which landed on PNG’s laps on 16th September 1975.
Beyond that era, PNG is craving for another Knight with an economic armour that can enable Papua New Guinea to develop itself with much needed physical infrastructure across the whole country that will enable BUSINESS and TRADE to prosper.PNG needs it.
A war that is opportune. Its timing is very right and necessary that the nation’s young generation managers must ensure that national sovereignty is not compromised in this “LOOK NORTH” commercial interest.
PNG needs it, not so much in an invasion type relationship, but selected economic investments across the country, not just Port Moresby.
The nation has recently signed a defence agreement with United States and more recently visited China a short distance to the North, for the economic opportunities that is available.
PNG was responding to a formal invitation by China to attend the Third Belt and Road Forum for International Development and Cooperation. A package bundle that is worth billions of Kina.
PNG signed agreements to receive China’s financial assistance targeting Economics, trade Enhancement, Education and other fluid bundle of “As is where is’’ financial assistance.
While the Roundtable News Desk in London, quoted a former PNG Diplomat in London who described this whole development as “two elephants playing on a patch of grass and its people are that patch of grass” is a very realistic perception. 
The quote went on to describe the December 1941 to September 1945 pacific conflict crusade as a comparison of Papua New Guineans as by-standers, it will be fair and just to say that, back then the “patch of grass were by-standers.”
Not anymore. That “patch of grass” is now fully grown and fortunately have prickles after 78 years of experience with forty-eight years of it as a sovereignty with an identity and backbone.
It’s time to play our blessings as the bridge, not over river Kwai this time BUT strategically and geo-politically connecting the East to the West across the south pacific trade route.
It’s a blessing by making, not by default. It’s the country’s blessing.
This time, no colonialist will be dictating but Papua New Guineans taking charge of its own destiny as that “patch of grass”.
When the nation feels that any of the elephants are stamping too hard, all it needs to do is prickle its feet and the elephant will feel the pinch.
The economic opportunity is right and now to progress the nation. PNG must take it.
Tagged: Australia and China., LOOK NORTH, PNG, PNG Diplomat in London, simple living 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-at-a-glance/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
In TERMS of surface area PNG’s territory encompasses 462,840 square kilometers (sqkm) with a coastline stretching 5152sqkm dotted by 600 islands.We share a common border with the largest Muslim nation of the world, Indonesia that is 820km long.
The National Population Census of 2011 put PNG’s population at 7.28 million with a fast growing rate of 3.2 per cent per year. The challenge is to match the rate at which we are increasing in numbers with the ability to provide goods and service; that is govern adequately.
The sad story about gender equality is that women are expected to outlive men. According to the United Nations average life expectancy for women in PNG is 63.2 years compared to 58.5 years for men.Generally, the population is fairly young with a median age of just under 22 and an estimated 40 per cent under 15 years of age.
Forty-three per cent of the population is Highlands-based. Twenty-five per cent in Mamose, 18 per cent in Southern provinces and 14 per cent in the New Guinea Islands.To work out your region’s population, multiply thecountry’s total by your percentage and then divide by 100.
We keep referring to rural areas as places that are outside of cities. This is incorrect.
There are urban centres such as the provincial capitals and they have their town boundaries. Rural places are the villages and hamlets that are in the countryside – the mountains, the valleys, swamps, islands, rainforests, grasslands and coastline.Around 85 per cent of our people are to be found in these rural settings and they predominantly practise subsistence agriculture.According to the National Statistical Office, Port Moresby, the nation’s capital had 364,125 people in 2011. Lae, the second city to be established after Port Moresby reputedly had 200,000 and Mt Hagen, the third city, 400,000.
These figures cannot be trusted because PNG does not have a National Data Base and movement of people between provinces is very fluid. Port Moresby has become a hiding place for murderers escaping from their enemies in the Highlands.LANGUAGE
PNG is said to have more than 800 languages; there is no exact figure, just ‘over’ 800 and no language list has ever been found. Perhaps the national Data Base will show one day. But English is the official language and two other recognized lingua franca; Pidgin becoming the dominant language all over the country. The National carrier does not recognise this arrangement and excludes the use of Motu.RELIGION
There is no State religion. The Head of State, the British Monarch is Anglican but the Anglican church of PNG is one of the smallest Christian groups at around three per cent. The Constitution of the country allows freedom of religion. In its 2013 investment Climate Statement, the United States State Department said, the government of PNG welcomed foreign investment with a liberal investment regime.GOVERNMENT
The country is demarcated into four regions with 22 provinces within which are the National Capital District (NCD) and the Autonomous Region of Bougainville (ABG). The provinces are divided into 89 districts or electorates with 325 local government wards.The regions – Mamose, New Guinea Islands, Highlands and southern have no political representation while the provinces have elected governors.The National Parliament consists of 118 MPs who serve 5-year terms elected by universal suffrage under a Limited Preferential Voting system. This group is divided into 96 members of Parliament (MPs) elected from single member constituencies and 22 elected from single member provincial divisions. These divisions are the 18 provinces of PNG plus the ABG and NCD.MPs elected as provincial division representatives become governors of their provinces unless they are appointed as Minister to the National Executive Council in which case one of the constituency MP is elected to be the governor. But most prefer to be governor.The parliament is unicameral, meaning that Bills which pass a vote in the House do not need referral to an upper chamber, but can go directly into law. As a member of the Commonwealth, the country’s Head-of-State is the British monarch, represented by the governor-general who is elected by parliament for a 6-year term and may be re-elected only once, provided he or she secures a two-thirds majority vote.CLIMATE
Temperatures and rainfall are subject to the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone, the South Pacific Convergence Zone and the West Pacific Monsoon.PNG is the 12th most disaster-prone country in the world. Located in the Pacific ring of fire, the most seismically-active region of the planet, PNG is exposed to risks including earthquakes, tsunami, tropical cyclones, volcanic eruptions and systematic flooding.BIODIVERSITY
As hot as PNG is seismically, 4.5 per cent of the planet’s known mammals are found here. There are more than 800 species of birds rivaling the number of languages we speak and almost 300,000 vascular plants that supplement our oxygen tank.Thirty-eight of the world’s 42-known species of Birds-of-Paradise favour PNG as their country of choice, so does the planet’s biggest butterfly – the Queen Alexandra bird-wing. Joining them in the exclusive stakes area the largest specie of tree frog, pigeon and orchids. Twelve of the known 14 species of tree kangaroos are found in PNG and to top the list, the planet’s only- known poisonous bird.NATURAL RESOURCE
While minerals and hydrocarbon resource dominate exports, 85 per cent of the country’s population is employed in the agriculture sector accounting for around one –third of Gross Domestic Product or GDP which is a measurement of the permanent cash income of citizens.Our primary agriculture exports are coffee, tea, cocoa, copra and palm oil. PNG was world’s seventh- largest producer and third-largest exporter of palm oil in 2008, accounting for 1.3 per cent of global exports. We were the seventeenth largest producer of coffee in 2010 accounting for 0.7 per cent of global production.
According to the National Fisheries Authority, out total annual tuna catches averaged around 482,000 tonnes between 2006 and 2011, representing some eleven per cent of global catch.ISLAND HISTORY
While archaeological evidence of human habitation dates back 60,000 years, the first written records of life in the eastern half of Papua go back to the first European contact in 1526. The island of New Guinea is the second biggest in the world after Greenland.INVESTMENT
After 43 years of nationhood, PNG still hold s a special significance for Australians. Results from the Lowy institute’s 2015 Poll – Australia and the World – showed that Aussies feel a strong sense of obligation to PNG. Eighty-two per cent of Aussies agreed that stability in PNG was important to Australia’s national interest and 77 per cent said Australia had a moral obligation to help PNG.Australia is PNG’;s largest trading partner and largest source of foreign investment. PNG was forecast to be the world’s fastest growing economy in 2015 but only a minority (37 per cent) agreed that PNG had strong economic prospects.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Ling-Stuckey Benched The predicted Cabinet reshuffle occurred yesterday with Treasurer Ian Ling-Stuckey becoming the bombshell victim.
Govt increase funding by K93.6 million The government tuition fees funding for this year has increased by K93.6 million, according to the Education Secretary Dr Uke Kombra.
Daki out, Dr Joseph in as Defence minister Social Democratic Party members were all smiles yesterday as Deputy Leader for SDP and Nipa-Kutubu MP Dr Billy Joseph was named as the new PNG Defence Force Minister.
Youths with no school and job, I will find you: Marape Youths between the ages of 15 and 30, who have dropped out of school or with no jobs, I want your names, says Prime Minister James Marape.
Women’s group Donate fresh garden foods to CPL THE Enga Enda Anda women’s group in Enga province is the first from outside of Port Moresby to come forward and donate fresh garden foods to CPL group of companies…
Asia and the Pacific swap places According to the World Health Organization, Universal Health Coverage (UHC) requires that all people receive the promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative health services they need and can afford.
Pirate attacks on rise in Morobe waters Pirate attacks in the coastal waters of Morobe and Popondetta are becoming a concern. In the past five years, there have been incidences of pirates taking control of boats ferrying…
Application for school fee subsidy program open Applications are open for the Eastern Highlands governor’s tuition fee subsidy assistant program.
Dragons miss out again St George Illawarra’s recruitment drive has hit another snag after the Canberra Raiders rejected a release request from hooker Zac Woolford to immediately move to the Dragons.
US in new strikes against Houthi  The United States military said on Wednesday its forces conducted strikes on 14 Houthi missiles that were loaded to be fired from Yemen, in the fourth day of US…
Grabbing US$300 billion of Russian assets is no solution, West cautions Western officials said in Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday that they were open to the idea of confiscating U$300 billion (K1.1 trillion) of Russian assets to help Ukraine, but cautioned that…
US Treasury official discusses cholera outbreak, debt with Zambia The United States Treasury Department’s top international official spoke with Zambia’s finance minister on Wednesday and discussed Zambia’s ongoing debt restructuring and its response to a recent cholera outbreak, the…
Guatemalan ex-president barred from entering US Former Guatemalan President Alejandro Giammattei has been barred from entering the US over allegations of “his  involvement in significant corruption,” the State Department said on Wednesday.
Raki a star in the making The inaugural Kewabi Epari, Ialibu-Pangia Unity Cup has certainly unearted many hidden talents.
Wabo puts best foot forward If there is one push factor for PNG Hunters backline utility Sanny Wabo to retain a spot in the team, it would be his eight-month-old daughter, Ariel Sanny.
Doc clears Morea Morea Junior Good news coming out from the South Pacific Brewery sponsored PNG Hunters side is the return of injured fullback Morea Morea Jr.
Athletics PNG 2024 calendar Athletics PNG has released its 2024 Calendar of events with its main overseas event for the year being the Oceania Championships in Suva , Fiji, from June 4 to 8.
One dead in Kainantu ONE person has died and several homes burned as fighting erupted between the Isontenu & Puanano villages and the enemy tribe from Yauna, 8 & 9mile in Kainantu district, Eastern…
Use restraint and common sense CENTRAL police commander, Chief Inspector Laimo Aisi has called on police officers within his command to be “positive and restore the intergrity of the Constabulary”.
State of Emergency does not include curfew ACTING Police Commissioner Donald Yamasombi says there is no curfew in the recently announced 14 day State of Emergency in Port Moresby.
Security company warns hooligans The Night Owl Security Service has warned the hooligans to be wary of their impulsive looting on innocent targets.
Convention to help students grow in faith in Kundiawa THE Catholic Diocese of Kundiawa, for the first time, hosted the tertiary students’ formation convention aimed at helping students progress in the Catholic faith.
Kumul partners with Site Group to expand skills training Kumul Petroleum Holdings Limited through its training entity, the Kumul Petroleum Academy (KPA) is expanding its training capacity by building a new training facility next door to its fabrication facility.
Sepik Basin LOs seek answers on Nopan project Sepik Basin landowners are appealing to the government to clarify the progress of a petroleum exploration project in the region.
400,000 people to be impacted, says CPL CEO Approximately 400,000 people in the community that depend on Stop and Shop shops for everyday essentials are now impacted with the looting and damage of these shops in the National…
PNG joins global trade coalition Minister for International Trade and Investment, Richard Maru, while participating at the 54th annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland, has announced Papua New Guinea’s membership to…
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/18-provinces-confirmed-for-png-games/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The 8th PNG Games set to be hosted in Port Moresby has lured 18 provincial teams confirming their participation.PNG Sports Foundation CEO Albert Veratau said to date 18 provinces have confirmed participation by means of accreditation via the online registration portal.“Eighteen provinces are quite a lot and the four that are yet to register are; Enga, East Sepik, Madang and East New Britain,” said Veratau.
Veratau urged all provinces to be part of the Games as it is an integral part of PNG, saying; “that is why they are obliged to join in on the celebrations and exhibit provincial culture and pride enhancing National Unity and thus the theme of the 8th PNG Games is ‘Unity and Pride.”He said they are working closely with the PNG Olympic Committee, 11 Sporting Federations and NCDC to run the 8th PNG Games.“The eleven sports federation have been very positive and are excited to be a part of games organising committee,” he said.He said currently there is a total of 4,720 games participants that have already been accredited, but the tally is expected to increase to 6,000 when the remaining four provinces complete their registration later this month.“The new total will be close to the Honiara Pacific Games numbers,” said Veratau.He said now it all falls on the shoulders of the GOC as they have a daunting task to manage the 300 sports and general volunteers, 350 technical officials and 400 security personnel that brings the total up to 1,050 to provide assistance during the course of the Games.“I salute the 22 provincial governments and the 96 district development authorities for recognising the value sports adds to nation building by supporting the youths to proudly wear their respective provincial colours to this sporting event,” said Veratau.He also extended invitation to all government agencies and, NGO’s, business organisations and development partners to come forward and set up stalls at all the sporting venues to showcase their products and deliver awareness to those participating in the Games.“About 200,000 people are expected to visit the game venues over the 10 days kicking off with the opening ceremony on 10th January 2024.”
Tagged: 8th PNG Games, Albert Veratau, PNG Sports Foundation 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/guam-pips-png-in-close-match/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The atmosphere in the Sir John Guise Indoor Complex came to a stand still when PNG took on visiting country Guam in a close match last night.
PNG opened the points by shooting its first basket that was followed shortly after by the visiting side with a basket of their own, yet Guam managed to get a lead on PNG.
Half time saw Guam lead with 54 points to 36, and PNG came back with a new determination in the second half by chasing after them and pulling all the right steps in their defence and ball control and getting in those three-pointer baskets.
The spectators cheered the boys on, till they managed to get in the equaliser with 87 points to 87 with less than 3 minutes to go before full time, yet that didn’t stop Guam from making a run for it and sailing past PNG to record a 103 points to 94 at full time.
Despite the loss, the boys were cheered on for putting up a fight, which is the first they’ve done this week and keeping Guam on their toes throughout the match.
Coach Arvin Domingo congratulated PNG for maintaining the fighting spirit right till the very end of the game.
“Hats off to PNG, well coached team and no quitting on that team, they fought hard all the way and gave us a run in second half and there were things we wanted to capitalize on in second half and that is just the way the game goes, we are giving up second chance shots and allowing them to get offensive rebounds and score off that,” said Domingo.
Domingo said it was a great game against the host nation, despite them winning PNG brought the fight to them in all their possession and fought to maintain it.
Domingo said they are looking forward to a podium finish and so are playing and leaving everything they’ve got out on the floor.
He said one thing they have to work on as a team is to take care of the ball, “I think we gave it too many turn overs and it almost cost us the game and giving up offensive rebounds to the other team that almost cost us and these are some of the things that we can look back on and work on.”
Guam is taking on New Zealand today, and Domingo said they will try to keep them away from the ball and are looking forward to a great game today.
Meanwhile, New Zealand managed to get in a win over Samoa with 102 points to 83. While the Women’s side got thrashed by New Zealand 108 points to 28.
Tagged: basketball, Guam, PNG, Sir John Guise Indoor Complex 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-games-rescheduled/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The PNG Games Executive Committee in consultation with PNG Games Council Members has resolved to reschedule the 8th PNG Games again, pending respective Provincial Administrations’ assurances that key expenses will be met to ensure participation.
This decision was reached when 18 provinces failed to convince the Games Organising Committee that they would show up at the Games earmarked for delivery from 10th-20th January 2024.
As of 29th December 2023; feedback from Provincial teams revealed that only Team Manus and Team Milne Bay have secured plane tickets to fly into Port Moresby, Team Gulf secured buses to travel by road to the host City to join Team Central and Team NCD.
Four provinces out of the 22 provinces did not meet the minimum requirement to participate.
With less than two weeks before the Opening Ceremony, most provinces were still fundraising to secure sufficient funds to fly their teams to Port Moresby.
The Games Organising Committee had no choice but to request the Council Executive Committee give the provincial teams more time to source sufficient funds to budget for travel, accommodation, meals, uniforms, and other costs.
In endorsing the decision; Albert Veratau, the Chairman of the PNG Games Council acknowledged the National Sporting Bodies, National Capital District Commission, and National Cultural Commission for supporting PNG Sports Foundation in delivering the Games.
He also thanked the hardworking provincial team management, coaches, and fundraising committees for exhibiting exceptional commitment and resilience to put provincial teams together during the past six months.
There is now a call out by the Council for all provincial governments to support their provincial teams.
The PNG Games has impacted the lives of thousands of citizens in all provinces spread across two generations.
Since it’s a recognized national event the national government is obliged to appropriate separate funding for the delivery of the Games including travel subsidy for provincial teams as was done for the 5th PNG Games in 2012, in Kokopo East New Britain Province.
In the New Year, the Council will host a PNG Games Seminar in Port with the objective being to review the Games including the charter. 
This will be the first time in 20 years for the Games to be evaluated since its inception in 2003.
Invitations will be sent out to prominent sports investors including Sir Peter Ipatas and Tony Green PNGOC senior vice president to speak at the seminar followed by general discussions and resolutions for the way forward.
Tagged: PNG Games, PNG Games Executive Committee, PNG Sports Federation 
‘All secondary teachers must have a provisional registration certificate’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-is-the-core-of-melanesia/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The 7th Melanesian Arts and Culture Festival has come to an end as the PNG contingent arrived in Port Moresby last week Friday.
Minister for Arts, Tourism and Culture Isi Henry Leonard highlighted that as the big brother among the Melanesian countries, PNG brought life to the festival in every sense.
“Prior to our arrival, the festival felt incomplete by most of the participating countries. When PNG arrived and took the stage, the event was brought to life as the big brother country stormed in with multiple exquisite traditional performance, displaying the strength and spirit of Melanesian brotherhood,” he said.
“In our absence, their numbers were small and the diversity was limited. But as soon as we arrived, you could see how our presence lifted the spirits of our brothers and sisters from the other side and we all showcased our culture brilliantly to the rest of the World who were present at the event.”
“PNG is the core of Melanesia that holds our people together as one. As the big brother we must do our best and take lead wherever we can, to preserve our people, culture and our Melanesian way of life.”
The contingent of performers who represented PNG in Vanuatu included traditional groups from Bougainville, West New Britain, Hela, East New Britain and stage performers from the UPNG Arts faculty.
PNG had the biggest contingent apart from the other Melanesian countries who were present including Fiji, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands.
The PNG contingent”, however, missed the opening ceremony and arrived four days late due to delays in the allocation of funds.
Mr Leonard said the other Melanesian countries have also expressed their gratitude to PNG.
“I would like to commend the National Cultural Commission and the government who were supportive to make this all possible, including SoE Minister William Duma and Air Niugini.“I would also like to thank our participants who represented their country with pride,” he said.
“Culture is a significant part of our country and people, therefore we must all do our best to preserve, promote and practice it wherever we can.
“Our culture defines us as Papua New Guineans and Melanesians, which gives us our unique identity from the rest of the world.”
He further added that engagement in the cultural space is good for sectors such as tourism and investment, which is beneficial for the economy of the four Melanesian states.
“Our culture is also under threat from other cultures that are being introduced. We must do more of these cultural activities not only to protect them, but attract foreigners as well.
Melanesians are unique from the rest of the world and this is the stage where we showcase ourselves,” he said.
Tagged: Melanesian Arts and Culture Festival, Melanesian countries, Minister for Arts, National Cultural Commission, Papua New Guineans, Tourism and Culture Isi Henry Leonard, UPNG Arts faculty 
‘All secondary teachers must have a provisional registration certificate’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/develop-set-criteria-for-png-kilepa/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The amount of the Green Climate Fund’s accessed already by Papua New Guineans is insignificant and is of great concern.
Minister for Environment, Conservation and Climate Change, Simon Kilepa made this known in his meeting with Executive Director of the Green Climate Fund (GCF), Mafalda Duarte at the United Nations General Assembly in New York.
“Having heard from country leaders so far during the Climate Ambition Summit, it is clear that current funding is adequate to enable swift implementation of adaptation and mitigation activities,” he said.
Mr Kilepa specifically requested for GCF to consider developing a special set of criteria to enable Papua New Guinea and other small island developing states to qualify and successfully draw-down its financial support for priorities including, displaced communities experiencing loss and damages due to severe impacts of climate change.
Together with other Pacific Island country leaders, discussions were held around a new reform program to enable the Fund to efficiently manage US$50 billion by 2030.
Revealed at the UN Climate Ambition Summit in New York, the “50 by 30” vision sets out to:
Enhance support for the most vulnerable people and communities;
Reinvent the partnership model including the accreditation process;
Pivot operations to prioritise broadscale, system transforming programs over isolated projects.
A request was made for the GCF Executive Director to send a strong message to Accredited Entities to start re-prioritising and align to PNG’s GCF Country Program and move projects in the pipeline.
Following the recent National Climate Summit, Mr Kilepa on behalf of the government extended an invitation to Ms Duarte to attend next year’s event, which will focus on implementation and climate finance.
Mr Kilepa thanked GCF for the opportunity to engage and pledged support to engage more constructively when Papua New Guinea takes up membership to the GCF Board next year as alternative board member under the Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Seat.
Tagged: Conservation and Climate Change, Environment, Green Climate Fund, Simon Kilepa 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/a-year-of-collaboration-and-achievements-for-png/

A year of collaboration and achievements for PNG - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
As the year 2023 comes to an end, and a new year dawning, thousands of parents and their children will be scratching, shoving and pushing to put their children to a school – especially those who’s child missed out on tertiary placings.
The country will also look forward to some “political games” come February as some “mischievous” turns comes to a fore – the Vote of No Confidence!
But this is not to say the least! – Papua New Guinea experienced a transformative year in 2023, marked by significant bilateral collaborations and remarkable achievements in various sectors.
The year began with Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese addressing the National Parliament, setting the tone for a productive and eventful year.
The highlight of the year came in December when PNG and Australia signed a historic K455 million security agreement, solidifying their commitment to regional stability.
Throughout the year, PNG engaged in high-level meetings and collaborations with several world leaders, including United States President Joe Biden, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Indonesian President Joko Widodo, French President Emmanuel Macron, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, South Korean President Yoon Suk Yeol, and Chinese President Xi Jinping. 
These meetings aimed to strengthen diplomatic ties, foster economic partnerships, and explore areas of mutual cooperation.
One of the most significant collaborations was with Australia, resulting in the signing of a Bi-lateral Security Agreement worth K455 million.
This agreement signifies the commitment of both countries to enhance security measures and protect their shared interests.
The People’s Republic of China also played a vital role in PNG’s development. Direct flights between Guangzhou and Port Moresby were launched by Southern China Airlines, promoting tourism and facilitating trade between the two nations.
The Chinese government provided a K50 million grant to build business and technical facilities in selected schools in PNG.
Additionally, the Metallurgical Corporation of China began downstream processing in PNG through the Ramu Nickel project.
PNG’s membership in the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, a significant global financial institution, further strengthened its position in the international arena.
The collaboration with the United States resulted in the signing of two defence agreements, namely the Defence Cooperation Agreement and the Shipriders Agreement.
These agreements bolstered PNG’s external border security and facilitated closer co-operation between the two countries.
The opening of the US Aid office in Port Moresby also signified increased bilateral engagement.
In an effort to promote agricultural expertise, PNG opened an embassy in Jerusalem, Israel and entered into an agreement for training Papua New Guineans in specialist agriculture.
Likewise, PNG and Indonesia established a direct air service between Bali and Port Moresby and secured 2000 student scholarships for PNG students to study in Indonesia.
France demonstrated its support for PNG’s forest management efforts by providing a K344 million ‘country package’.
France recognised PNG as a ‘Forest Nation’, acknowledging its valuable contribution to global forest conservation.
PNG received further backing from France at European Union, G7, and G20 forums, positioning itself as a leading advocate for sustainable forestry.
The European Union contributed K210 million for the Forestry, Climate Change, and Biodiversity Program, co-ordinated by French President Emmanuel Macron. 
This program aims to address pressing environmental issues and promote sustainable development in PNG.
Beyond international collaborations, PNG also witnessed significant domestic achievements. 
The year began with the nation mourning the loss of one of its first prime ministers, Sir Rabbie Namaliu.
However, the country quickly rebounded by launching its Fourth Medium-Term Development Plan, guiding its vision for the next four years.
PNG actively participated in international summits, attending the Melanesian Spearhead Group Summit in Vanuatu, opening an embassy in Jerusalem, and hosting the first PNG-Asia Mining & Petroleum Conference in Hong Kong, targeting Asian investors.
It maintained a strong presence at key global forums, including the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Leaders’ summit in San Francisco and the Pacific Islands Forum Summit in the Cook Islands.
Other notable achievements included the release of the highest National Budget to date, totaling K27.377 billion for 2024.
The Barrick Gold Corporation re-opened the Porgera mine but production to begin first quarter of next year, a pioneering step in reclaiming resource ownership.
With a 51% stake in the mine, Papua New Guinean stakeholders celebrated unprecedented benefits sharing in natural resource development.
Another milestone was the establishment and commissioning of the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC).
This landmark anti-corruption agency is the culmination of decades-long efforts and exemplifies PNG’s commitment to combating corruption and ensuring good governance.
The success of the Internal Revenue Commission (IRC) and Customs further contributed to PNG’s achievements, as both agencies consistently exceeded revenue collection targets.
This financial stability has played a crucial role in funding national development initiatives and shaping the 2024 National Budget.
As 2023 draws to a close, Papua New Guinea reflects on a year filled with remarkable collaborations and achievements.
These milestones set a strong foundation for continued growth, development, and international recognition for the nation.
Let us have hope for 2024 with more achievements to come! Happy New Year 2024!
Tagged: Anthony Albanese, Benjamin Netanyahu, Emmanuel Macron, Joe Biden, Joko Widodo, Narendra Modi, National Parliament, Xi Jinping, Yoon Suk Yeol 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/how-government-subsidies-could-literally-turn-out-the-lights-on-png/

How Government Subsidies Could Literally Turn Out the Lights on PNG - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
			How Government Subsidies Could Literally Turn Out the Lights on PNG		
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
How embarrassing! Like Vision City shopping mall running out of stuff to sell. 
Or the Yacht Club running out of boats, and seawater. Yet, electricity has almost found a special place in our survival and existence- along with water, air and freedom.
An air or water outage has pretty severe consequences. As we see in Gaza now though – electricity provides the air (and medical ventilation), water, a thousand other things we need to live.
Many newspapers around the country and region have reported the political side of PNG’s own recent outages.
Landowner groups, retail firms and host of others have already started demanding compensation.
Such examples show that some of the economic issues surrounding power outages should grap our interest far more than the mere politics of power.
Imagine living without your mobile phone. Even now, you probably go to a nearby friend or untended-to wall socket for a recharge. Life without WhatsApp? YouTube? You actually have no idea.
Daily life in PNG will – within 10 years – resemble the ‘handphone’ centric lives of our brothers and sisters in Indonesia, Singapore and even Hong Kong. You can’t even see a menu in many of the restaurants in my neighbourhood without a mobile phone. No QR code? No service. 
Worse for the average Papua New Guinean, many government services will be offered online or not-at-all. Taxes. 
Your daily economic life will get worse because of all the extra free government money PNG’s electricity sector gets. As discussed in my overview of PNG’s 2024 Budget, PNG Power represents one of the biggest state-owned entities (and certainly public services) targeted for subsidization. Who cares?
Us economists call it the ‘damage squared rule.’ Our economist forefathers worked out the problems these subsidies and the ‘squared’ damages they cause. 
These economists have shown that K500 in subsidizes don’t just cause K500 in wasted wages, fun or profit. Subsidies cost K250,000! Or (500)2 for you math lovers. 
The reason is that these subsidizes filter out into the economy. They dampen, restrict and depress all kinds of spending. 
Lots of workers dash their plans to spend a K500 night out. Or hire extra part-time gig help at the shop. Savers, consumers, charities – everyone pulls back on the reins a little. 
The pot shirks for everyone by far more than it does for anyone.This result is one of the e=mc2 of public economics.
Come on. Some power outages have not turned PNG into the deep, dark Amazon. A bit of government money to a state owned/supported power company can hardly cause the end of the world.
But let’s look at all the cases were governments kept subsidizing electricity. The more they did it, the more they had to do it. 
Until the economic crisis hit. Every year, the headlines always read the same. The IMF and World Bank demand the end of electricity subsidies – and government coalitions fall. Outages mean demand for electricity exceeds supply. Duh!
When demand for electricity exceeds supply, you see it as outages and feel it as higher power bills. Households end up subsidized. 
National debt rises. And governments fall. Just look how governments like Malaysia’s have pulled back on promises to provide electricity. 
In most countries I’ve visited, power outages represent a first flicker of a larger power failure.
This seems like a stupid question. Not so stupid. PNG represents one of the few red countries on the world map of power-cut also-rans.
The lack of an effectively regulated and run private sector electricity market represents one of the many reasons for the PNG’s soaring corruption.
If we as Papua New Guineans can’t muster the courage to closely monitor crooked procurement and spending, we definitely deserve one able to keep the lights on. Lots of countries couldn’t – even with all the petrol and LNG they could want.
The power cuts in Lebanon (caused exactly as described above) represent one such example. We get black outs – but look at all the ‘free’ services we get. 
Remember emc2? The PNG’s subsidized power costs the budget a fortune. And jeopardizes the quality of life here badly. 
So badly that thousands of experts have started asking if parliaments world-wide like ours need to think about a “universal right to electricity.”
As we saw in the introduction, we need it almost as badly as air and water. Even in rich places like America, the uneven distribution of steady, reliable electricity tended to kill certain poor, disadvantaged communities far more than others.
Pass a budget amendment act. Reduce electricity subsidizes. I can tell you – just by looking at the lights shining below as I fly into PNG at night – where the biggest graft is taking place. Tonight. Right now. Find every mid-level government official with a fancy watch and house. 
Make them buy their own electricity. I can tell you which neighbourhoods need the subsidies and which ones don’t – just by driving through. The taxes they fail to pay harms you and your family by far faster than the speed of light. They make all your harms ‘squared’.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/explore-png-with-trans-niugini-tours/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
FOR this Christmas holiday, New Year, or next year for your birthday, celebrate with a booked tour using Trans Niugini Tours to see the many sides of Papua New Guinea.
Trans Niugini Tours is what is known to the travel trade as an inbound tour operator and they offer all tourism services that are available in PNG to their overseas clients. 
It is a private PNG company that comes under the name Trans Niugini Tours Limited and it started operating in 1975.
The name has been in use now for almost 50 years as when they still first came up with the name, the country was just forming and it seemed appropriate at the time. Initially, they started out with tourist buses and operating them between the main highland towns.
The main headquarters is in Mount Hagen and it has a small operational office in Port Moresby. Their main mission is to show the world the culture and natural beauty of PNG in comfort.
If someone were to describe their company, they would say that they are a destination management company that can make bookings for all tourist services in Papua New Guinea, put them together and operate a tour in PNG for clients.
They have two main markets, a domestic PNG market and an international market. For the international market, they deal directly with international tour operators in other countries and they in turn have their own client base.
For the domestic market, they normally deal directly with the individual person, a family or a company. The domestic market would pay with cash, internet bank transfer or by credit card.
They tailor tours for people not only for their budget but also for what they would like to see or experience in Papua New Guinea. 
As for how expensive it is, it is very much dependent on what people want to see and do as well as how long they would like to stay. If you wish to book a tour, just know that their peak season is from July to October.
The companys main vision and mission is to show the world the culture and natural beauty of PNG in comfort. 
They are unique in that they own and operate their own tourist plant which includes, lodges, buses, boats and airplanes. 
The top destinations that people usually go for when they book with Trans Niugini Tours would be the companys own lodges in Papua New Guinea such as Karawari Lodge, Ambua Lodge, Lake Murray Lodge ,the Sepik Spirit and Bensbach wildlife Lodge.
They are environmentally friendly as two of their lodges have their energy supplied by mini hydroelectric power (water turbines) while two others (Bensbach and Lake Murray) are operated by 100% solar power.
Most of their international clients are interested in Cultural, Birding or Nature tours. Their domestic clients are interested in forest walks and relaxing in the cool highland temperatures or having a birthday party, meeting or conference. 
They also have fishermen who fish at Bensbach or Lake Murray.
If you want to book your tour today then you can contact them by telephone, email or social media or type in the words ‘Trans Niugini Tours’ on Google and visit their website. 
If you wish to pay for your tour, the company accepts cash, online bank transfers and credit cards.
Over the years they have had the following people stay with them; Sir Mick Jagger, Sean Lenon (John Lennon’s son-of Beatle fame), Buz Aldrin (Walked on the moon with Neil Armstrong), and David Attenborough. 
All these famous people have booked tours using Trans Niugini Tours and have visited the land of a thousand tribes. 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/china-defends-pngs-role/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The Chinese Foreign Affairs ministry was this week forced to defend PNG’s role in its Belt and Road Initiative.This is two months after inviting Prime Minister James Marape to be part of the grand forum to mark the initiative’s 10th anniversary in Beijing.“China stands ready to continue working with Papua New Guinea to synergize the development strategies, expand practical cooperation in various fields under the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative on the basis of mutual respect and equal-footed consultation, and pursue common development,” Ministry spokesperson Mao Ning said on Monday.
Mao said this in Beijing during her daily press conference, where she was asked if Mr Marape’s comments about being careful with foreign loans, especially BRI funding, was a cause for concern for China.“Papua New Guinea is the first Pacific Island country to sign an MOU on Belt and Road cooperation and Belt and Road cooperation plans with China.“It has played a leading role and set an example in the Belt and Road cooperation between China and Pacific Island countries.” Before Mr Marape’s trip to Beijing at the invitation of the Chinese government, PNG Treasurer Ian-Ling Stuckey, who was part of the delegation, had said that part of the discussions with China would involve negotiations for cheap, affordable loans from the Asian giant.But after the trip, not much was revealed from the Treasurer or Prime Minister if there was any loan secured from China.But Mr Marape did announce PNG’s ascension into full membership with the Asian Infrastructure Development Bank (AIIB), the world’s second largest multi-lateral development bank.Papua New Guinea’s membership with the AIIB allows it a wider set of financing options for its development goals.Mr Marape said this when making the announcement upon his return from Beijing.Mr Marape also announced the opening of trade and investment opportunities with Chinese companies, targeting PNG’s natural resources and Chinese technology.While in Sydney this week for bilateral engagements and a business forum, Mr Marape again told journalists that he values China’s relationship, which is based on trade and development and not security or politics.
Tagged: Belt and Road Initiative, China, Ian-Ling Stuckey, James Marape, Mao Ning 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-collaborates-with-eu-france/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
AT the COP28 Global Climate Action Summit, held on December 2nd, Papua New Guinea collaborated with the European Union and France to unveil a comprehensive country package designed for forests, nature and climate.
The goal was to halt deforestation by 2030 and to preserve the country’s natural resources for future generations. 
The country package was a pioneering financing mechanism resulting from an international dialogue aimed at strengthening North-South solidarity.
It united donor countries, NGOs, philanthropists and multilateral development banks to ensure the sustainability of PNG’s conservation policies through the mobilisation of joint funding.
The initiative included a suite of programs, partnerships, and investments dedicated to the preservation of nature, forests, and the mitigation of climate impact.
At a special event, European Commission Vice-President Maroš Šefčovič, French Minister of State Chrysoula Zacharopoulou, and PNG Internal Security Minister Peter Tsiamalili endorsed a political declaration, officially launching the “country package.”
The initial funds for the package originated from the European Union, France, the Global Environment Facility of the World Bank, and the FAO/UICN seed fund.
The announced initial US$100 million (PGK 344 million) included the European Union-funded flagship Forestry, Climate Change, and Biodiversity (EU-FCCB) program in Papua New Guinea.
The country package had already garnered support from several partners, including Australia, the Global Environment Facility, the Asian Development Bank, and more.
However, there was still hope for more financial commitments from additional partners in the run-up to COP29, where the definitive Country Package was slated to be signed.
For the people of Papua New Guinea, the country package promised a better future where their natural resources could be preserved, and they could live in harmony with their environment.
It was a moment of hope and inspiration that would be forever remembered in the country’s history.
Tagged: and PNG Internal Security Minister Peter Tsiamalili, Australia, COP28 Global Climate Action Summit, European Commission Vice-President Maroš Šefčovič, European Union, French Minister of State Chrysoula Zacharopoulou, the Asian Development Bank, the Global Environment Facility 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-continues-to-build-its-energy-supply0/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Exxon Mobil Chairperson and Managing Director, Tera Shandro says PNG has built a reputation as the world’s largest energy supplier.
“We believe that Papua has much to give to the country, proposed plans are an example of what energy can give to the country.”
“Even when Papua comes online, PNG will only make 2 percent of LNG supply in the world.”
Ms Shandro said, “PNG’s third potential project could be Py’nyang.”
She further stated that Energy supplier could also mean Papua New Guinea has cemented its role as Energy supplier well before 2050.”
Read more in your Nambawan Daily tomorrow – Tuesday, December 12, 2023.
Tagged: Exxon Mobile Chairperson and Managing Director Tera Shandro 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-singapore-to-implement-carbon-credits/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Papua New Guinea and Singapore have signed a groundbreaking Implementation Agreement at the COP28 meeting in Dubai.
The ceremony, herald by Papua New Guinea’s Minister for Environment, Conservation and Climate Change, Simon Kilepa and Singapore’s Minister for Sustainability and the Environment, Grace Fu, marks a significant leap forward in international collaboration to address climate challenges.
Mr Kilepa expressed his gratitude on behalf of the government of PNG at the signing ceremony, emphasising the agreement’s importance in strengthening the cordial bilateral relations between PNG and Singapore.
He highlighted the agreement’s role in fostering constructive dialogue and co-operation in areas of mutual interest, including climate change, trade, and investment.
Ms Fu shared her great pleasure in joining Mr Kilepa to sign Singapore’s first-ever Implementation Agreement.
This agreement holds particular significance as it solidifies a partnership with Papua New Guinea, a fellow member of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS).
Both ministers acknowledged the critical role of Article 6 as a mechanism in enabling countries to voluntarily co-operate in achieving climate targets, including Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), while advancing global climate action and ambition.
The Implementation Agreement sets up a bilateral framework for the transfer of carbon credits with corresponding adjustments aligned with Article 6, providing a pathway for financing meaningful climate mitigation projects in PNG.
Key components of the agreement include a requirement for project developers to cancel 2 per cent of authorised carbon credits at issuance, ensuring an overall mitigation of global emissions. 
Additionally, project developers will contribute an equivalent of 5 per cent share of proceeds towards adaptation action in PNG, advancing both mitigation and adaptation actions in line with the Paris Agreement goals.
Mr Kilepa applauded the partnership as a milestone for PNG and thanked the technical officials from both countries for their tireless efforts in ensuring the agreement’s successful conclusion and signing.
Ms Fu stressed the imperative of high-integrity carbon markets, emphasising that the environmental integrity of carbon credits under this Implementation Agreement meets internationally recognised standards.
Both ministers anticipate the collaborative identification of mutually beneficial compliant carbon credit projects that contribute to achieving the NDCs of both countries, solidifying a commitment to sustainable development and climate resilience.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/tonga-given-scare-by-png/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The 8th world ranked team, Tonga, were given a scare by PNG in a late fight-back before losing 62-54.
PNG (ranked 36th) had to work overtime in the first quarter chasing down the Tongans leading 21-9.
Heading into the quarter break, coach Annie Iamo gave her players the much-needed motivational talk which saw the team’s attacking tempo lift.
Taking charge of the point scoring duties under the hoop was captain Japerth Tulapi and Goloa Ovoa.
The duo managed to salvage better ball possession and turn the opportunities into their favour to narrow the margin (31-23) heading to half-time.
The third and final quarter was quite intense as both teams defensively stood up and shut down attacking phases heading their way.
Tonga had the upper hand in leading the third quarter (52-36) but they were put under defensive pressure when PNG regrouped at quarter break and kept on mounting attack after attack in the final quarter.
Despite going down 54-62, Iamo said she was impressed with the team that comprised mostly of youngsters who put up a good fight against a much more experienced Tongan outfit.
The inclusion of Jayden Molo at mid-court really lifted the match tempo heading into the dying minutes of the final whistle.
“That was a really great performance and I’m really proud of the girls…they did exceptionally well,” said Iamo.
“They (young players in the team) were exceptional,” she added.
The transition within the team is something Iamo is happy about and insists they will get better heading into their next match today against the Cook Islands, tomorrow against Vanuatu and then Niue on Thursday.
It will be another interesting match-up against the Cook Islanders given PNG defeated them at the recently held Singapore Series.
“We just have to make sure we finish second in our pool to have a better chance of making the cross-over for the playoffs.
“Definitely this win by Tonga has motivated the team to rise to the challenge ahead,” added Iamo.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-must-be-politically-stable/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PAPUA New Guinea in its desire to become a full member of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) needs to seek the support of all its members and fulfill the requirements of ASEAN.
A recently graduated Master of International Public Policy Paul Panao in Japan, presented his research work on PNG’s pursuit to be a full member of ASEAN.
PNG foreign policy review (2016) indicated that the current foreign policy of growing PNG’s connections in a globalising world in the major foreign policy statement, “PNG connect”, draws positive achievements of previous governments while pointing the way forward in a changing global environment. 
There are further diversification and development of PNG relations in Asia, and combined with a commitment and development of foreign relations and open ways for active outside engagement.
In his report, Mr Panao said PNG’s close association with the ASEAN community has contributed to the consolidation of bilateral relations with some of the member countries including; Malaysia, Singapore, Philippines, Indonesia, and Thailand, in the areas of trade, investment, technical and development assistance, defence and security, aviation, maritime, and fisheries co-operation.
“With respect to the issues regarding the opportunity for PNG to seek full membership of ASEAN in the future, many efforts have been made by successive PNG government’s to secure the support from the ASEAN member countries,” Mr Panao said.
Many ASEAN member countries want to be assured that PNG’s full membership to ASEAN in future will have not any adverse impact on its relations with members of the Pacific Islands Forum.
Few recommendations highlighted include: PNG must show the value and tangible benefits that it can bring to ASEAN members, to ensure that the country is politically stable; ensure that policies do not change when government changes; and policies on development aspirations are not disrupted to develop the tourism industry and others.
Tagged: Master of International Public Policy Paul Panao in Japan, member of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), Pacific Islands Forum. 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/11th-hour-backing-for-team-png-to-2023-pacific-games/

11th hour backing for Team PNG to 2023 Pacific Games - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PRIME Minister James Marape called on Team PNG to portray good sportsmanship and networking amongst other Pacific Island teams at the 2023 Pacific Games in Honiara, Solomon Islands.
Marape made this statement during official farewell function of the team at the Sir John Guise stadium’s indoor complex in Port Moresby. 
The function also saw the team receiving a timely 11th hour financial backing from National Gaming Control Board (K1 million), Kumul Mineral Holdings Limited (K4.24 million) and the National Government through the Department of Treasury (K3.26 million).
Marape said the government is always present to assist Team PNG, athletes and officials.
The financial assistance is timely as it will now off-set the outstanding levy fees that few sports could not pay up. Earlier this week, PNG Olympic Committee released a media statement outlining the said deadline for all levy fees to be paid by midday of November 10,
Meanwhile, the farewell function also saw Marape handing over the national flag to flag bearer, Ramona Padio.
Padio and PNG tennis player, Matthew Stubbings, were announced as the official flag bearers for Team PNG to the 2023 Pacific Games.
“Each of your are carrying our country’s flag…it is not only about the Games, build network.”
“Compete well and win medals. Remain focus and stay on course,” said Marape.
Tagged: Department of Treasury, Kumul Mineral Holdings Limited, National Gaming Control Board, Prime Minister James Marape 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

