https://www.postcourier.com.pg/new-category/png-top-stories/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
The government is already looking at reviewing legislations to tighten up labour laws in the country and one of them is the minimum wage.
Ling-Stuckey says message from businesses was received ‘loud and clear’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/the-png-australia-connection/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PNG Prime Minister James Marape will make history when he addresses the Federal Parliament at the invitation of Prime Minister Anthony Albanese. Australians believe in tradition which they keep strenuously. History is also something we should all believe in to understand the future. In looking forward to the upcoming event, here’s some background stuff.The Independent State of Papua New Guinea is a Pacific Melanesian nation of eight million people. Other Melanesian States are the former British Solomon Isles, Vanuatu, formerly French New Hebrides, New Caledonia and Fiji.In the Pacific are also Micronesian and Polynesian nations. In terms of world map, Papua New Guinea lies at the tip of Australia’s Far North Cape York Peninsula facing the Equator. Papua New Guinea or PNG is Australia’s nearest neighbour, closer than the Muslim State of Indonesia with whom PNG shares a common land border.At the extreme western end of the island of New Guinea, it is only a 10-minute boat ride to the Australian islands of Boigu and Saibai in the Torres Strait. Due to their closeness to the PNG mainland; there are traditional border crossings which is tolerated by Australia, just as happens on the land border at Vanimo on the PNG side and the Indonesian province of Irian Jaya.Irian Jaya was annexed by the Dutch but on departure at the first half of the 20th Century, handed over the indigenous Melanesians to Indonesia. The New Guinea part of the island annexed by the Germans was ‘given up’ basically, just before full-scale hostilities broke out to start WWII in PNG.Australia then assumed control over New Guinea as part of its jurisdiction over the mandated Trust Territory of Papua. After WWII, the protectorate became the Territory of Papua-New Guinea. The mandate to Australia was arranged by Britain at the United Nations because Britain said it was too far away to keep an eye on Papua.Papua was initially a British Protectorate and when mandated to Australia became its territory. The United Nations (UN) came into being as a result of loss of life and damage to economies experienced during WWII, as well as the hangover of WWI. Leaders of nations desiring peace came together to broker peace and the UN was born.It was at this time that decolonisation started and PNG happened to be at the right place at the right time. What triggered the avalanche was the change in political boundaries in the aftermath of the two great wars.
DECOLONISATIONThe assumption of responsibility over New Guinea invariably helped Australia because it demonstrated Australia’s resolve, proved its tenacity and this led to federation when ‘big brother’ Britain saw that Australia was indeed capable. Australia, as a fledgling nation itself had meager resources to be able to look after a dependency. But the belief was that ‘New Guinea’ was a territory of Australia and this paved the way for the recognition Australia needed to become the influence it got to be.Responsibility over New Guinea invariably helped AustraliaThe effects of the two World Wars affected Australia badly and as decolonisation swept the globe, Australia also warmed to the concept of peace and saw decolonisation as a necessary step in that direction. There was something else that invariably came into play as a political justification for the hand moving toward decolonisation.In the Second World War, Australia, like most people of the European race tend to do, went to meet the enemy half way – not to allow the enemy to set foot on home soil as that would amount to an invasion. Australia, to the Japanese who proved their skill as jungle fighters in the China and Korean wars, was a relatively easy topography. To allow the Japanese to set foot in Australia would not only spell disaster but, also, whatever the outcome waited at the end, national pride and sovereignty were at stake. By taking the fight to the enemy resolved these issues and New Guinea being Australia’s property was the place to engage the enemy.
DEFENCE OF AUSTRALIAAustralia fought in New Guinea to defend itself first and second, its territory. Since New Guinea is at the corridor to Australia, it became a strategic defence point for Australian security. It still is. When Douglas MacArthur was General Officer Commanding the South – West Pacific Theatre of War, this was how the defence of Australia was largely seen also; to block the advance of the Japanese in New Guinea.What actually won the day for the Allied forces was their battle strategy. Australia would take care of the air assault and the infantry and the US; the navy. The naval blockade prevented Japanese reinforcements and supplies from getting through as well as stifled any chances of retreat and regrouping. The hastily-trained Australians who flew US -supplied airplanes paid a certain price. But apart from the mop-up operations, Australia will forever relish in its war effort, notably the Battles of Kokoda, Gona and Buna-Sananada, all in the Northern Province of PNG. There were other engagements but none are more closer to the heart of Australians than these three battles.Kokoda was not only a hell of a place to fight because of its unforgiving terrain but it was also the last line of defence before Port Moresby, after which, the Japanese, if they advanced that far, would have had Australia within their sight. This was where the Fuzzy-Wuzzy Angel legend was born, and is today, the proudly- shared heritage of PNG and Australia.
SHARED INDEPENDENCEPNG on its part lacks the ability to adequately protect its borders even though new legislation has come into place. It will need Australian assistance in that regard and it is in the mutual interest of both countries to remain good and effective neighbours, the basis of which is the common heritage they share.PNG is politically independent. Socially, well; once a home-grown economic model is devised and put in place, it may lead to a clearer definition of its national character, beliefs and value systems. Economically, advancement in this sector is contingent on the social institutions being developed because they are already a part of the scenario whether PNG is industrialised or not.The country’s economy is still under customary traditions and beliefs but the fact that PNG is already a player on the world stage with borders crashing and the world becoming one global village, there is need to look at the social institutions- viz a viz – The family, economy, government and law, education and religion. All five are interconnected and herein lies the chance of developing national character and establishing its belief and value systems.PNG’s national economy, however, cannot be isolated from the world. One of the biggest challenges facing PNG is the human capacity and education, especially tertiary education, needed to empower citizens to engage in building the nation’s social structure. The PNG government is very much aware of this as a way of lifting the quality of life of its people and is hinting on people capacity-building as the basis of its economy rather than a service-driven economy.
In the colonial era the question – in whose interest was the PNG economy being built – was asked; the Papua New Guineans or the people who risked their money there? Australians like Gough Whitlam, Kim Beazley, Sir Paul Hasluck and C E Barnes were bold men, well-meaning and adventurous in their diplomacy toward the question of PNG independence.
That question of long ago still lingers. But the reality is that the policy of a Minister is like the economist’s view – always juggling between ideas to come to an agreement while the influencing factors are relentlessly active in their own way. The layman’s view is that the market economy has a lot to say about that. But again, it depends on political correctness and the prevailing circumstances. All anyone on both side of the Torres Strait can do is to take a bow in humble gratitude.
HOME RULEHome rule for PNG began as an idea. The idea initially came from the Federal Opposition. The Federal Opposition Leader in 1970 was Gough Whitlam and championing the cause of self determination for PNG saw him become prime minister two years later when Labor came into power.Whitlam arrived in the Territory and commenced his two-week tour on New Year’s Day, 1970. In Port Moresby he had consultations with leading territory figures, visited the university and later had a long briefing with senior army men including the commander of the Papua-New Guinea Command, Brigadier-General Eldridge. Later he had talks with several Port Moresby businessmen and senior Banking officials.The Australian said in an editorial: “Mr Whitlam’s target dates for home rule and Independence in New Guinea have crystalised steadily between the Government and Opposition. The Labor policy highlights two facts of life which the government refuses to face. First, the decision on when New Guinea is to become independent is not one for New Guinea alone. The time may well come when Australian opinion is not prepared to pay the political price of gradualism.And second, that the time left for the transfer of power is, in any event, extremely short. Discussion of New Guinea, such as it is, is the politician’s tendencies to conduct it in terms of sublime altruism. Australia’s national interests are just as much involved in the Independence issue as New Guinea’s. Both the Government and Opposition tacitly recognise the fact even if they define the interests differently.A definite date for home rule is vital and there seems nothing wrong with Mr Whitlam’s suggestion of 1972. Full Independence will inevitably follow soon afterwards. Perhaps after two years’ experience, could indicate how soon. But what is so clearly needed before either of these steps is removal of the dead-hand remote control system in Canberra which deprives even the present administration of independence, authority and proper exemplary value. Until the Administration has visible power that can be handed over to the native peoples, Independence will remain a half-myth in New Guinea”.Kim Beazley, the Labor Member for Freemantle accompanied Whitlam on the Opposition Leader’s tour of the Territory. From his report which he gave to the Post Courier, the campaign for Independence in New Guinea was focused on what he called the gunboat diplomacy of the key players ‘at row boat speed’ and directed at the Government, it turned the tide in Whitlam’s favour. Here is an excerpt from that report by Mr Beazley.“Increasingly, Papua-New Guinea is being run for the foreign investor. And the certain signal of the restoration of this imperial technique is the restoration of the imperial technique – the punitive expedition.” Beazley pointed out that in 1969 a punitive expedition using batons and tear gas sought to force the Rorovanas to sell their land to CRA at a price satisfactory not to themselves but to the Administration. After the visit to Canberra of Bougainville leaders Paul Lapun, MHA (Member of House of Assembly) and Raphael Bele, to tackle the conscience of the Government, Prime Minister Gorton ordered the Administration and its punitive expedition out of the affair. The natives then negotiated for themselves a deal 20 times better than did the Administration, which alleged itself to be protecting their interest.“Another punitive expedition of 1000 police went to deal with Mataungan Association members among the Tolai of New Britain. Again, Mr Gorton reversed the policy of the Administration. The 11,000 Tolai addressed by Mr Whitlam were a manifestation of growing land pressure in the Gazelle. The Minister for Territories, Mr C E Barnes has been subject to severe press criticism. When he is led by his heart and conscience, he is a winner in policy and wins the heart of native leaders”. Beazley said he had seen Mr Barnes do it. “Led by the advice of the hard-eyed economic developer, however, his policy somehow always ended in violent clashes.The Hasluck policy of equal pay for equal qualification had been discarded. It was in fact an Australian promise repudiated. Defending his policy in the House of Representatives on September 30, 1959, Mr Hasluck said: ‘Anyone – if there is anyone – who still thinks of New Guinea people as a mass of cheap labour to work for his sole advantage, and without ambition or claims of their own, not only is living in a fool’s paradise, but is basically building a fool’s hell.”“In conflicts with the most advanced sections of the people we have twice come to violent clash – the fool’s hell. So far Mr Gorton has intervened to avert the worst twice. This caprice is symptomatic of the loss of policy coherence since Sir Paul left the Ministry.” (Hasluck became the Governor-General).Sir Paul, advising the House of Representatives said: “The Territory of Papua-New Guinea is developing economically and will in future develop faster. But the level of local saving in Papua-New Guinea is low and finance for the major development projects comes predominantly from outside the Territory. Because of this, the Administration has in the past acquired – for future disposal to the people of the Territory – substantial equity holdings in certain enterprises, notably the Bougainville copper project and the New Britain palm oil project.“My government now proposes to ask the Territory House for legislation to establish a statutory corporation to acquire equity in major investment projects in the Territory. This new institution will have a close link with the Papua – New Guinea Development Bank. My Government will this month introduce a new scheme to practical, down to earth training of Papuans and New Guineans in Australia, in areas of training not available in the Territory”.In outlining the Government’s program Sir Paul said that the Government did not believe that an arbitrary date for Independence should be set by it. Even against the wishes of the people it will not do so, he said. “But my Government does believe in constant advancement towards self-government”, Sir Paul said.
INDEPENDENCE IN CONTINUATIONWe’ve seen so far that independence for PNG is in continuation. There is no question about its sovereignty and the business of governing the people and managing the nation which are continuing with remarkable success in some areas. But until a safe mark is reached where PNG will completely stand on its own, Australia is very much a part of the political, economic and social landscape of its neighbour. The colonial past and the obligations there make this inevitable and if Australia were to look in disdain to PNG’s struggles, its reputation would suffer. It is not ‘interference,’ rather, it is national conscience. Independence for PNG means as much to Australia as does to PNG so ours is a shared independence.
It is safe that way as this condition acts as a catalyst for strong bilateral relations. It’s hard to imagine that Australian budgetary support will be reduced or cut off completely. The Australian taxpayers can speak at the polls and political parties in Australia are acutely accountable to the voter so the riches in the mineral and petroleum sector may give the impression that we in PNG are making inroads. We bring the Australian people back to our earlier point that PNG needs to build its capacity.
Tagged: Anthony Albanese, British Solomon Isles, Fiji, French New Hebrides, James Marape, Vanuatu 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/wheels-are-turning-for-png/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PNG Chamber Of Resources and Energy President, Anthony Smare is giving his introductory remarks reminding the businesses that the wheels are turning for PNG in terms of resources and energy.
He further stated that for this year’s conference it is the biggest and the value of the conference is to get everyone involved in investment in one room.
“This conference provides the perfect venue for serendipity to happen, please visit the booths and connect with one and another.”
Read more in your Post-Courier tomorrow – Tuesday, December 12, 2023.
Tagged: PNG Chamber Of Resources and Energy President Anthony Smare, Prime Minister James Marape 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-continues-dominance/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Loyalty is what PNG women’s football team skipper Ramona Padio best describes their 6th gold medal win against Fiji on Friday night.
In front of a packed Solomon Islands National Stadium, Padio led the team to another stunning performance to defeat the shattered Fijians 4-1. 
Prior to attending the 17th Pacific Games, Padio confidently said with confidence during Team PNG’s farewell function at the Sir John Guise stadium in Port Moresby that they will retain the gold medal.
“I publicly announced that we will win the gold medal. We fulfilled our dream of bringing the gold medal back to PNG,” said Padio.
The unavailability of central defender Serah Waida due to conceding a red card following the 5-1 semifinal win over Samoa, saw the players feeling down that she (Waida) will not play in the gold medal play off.
Mentally the players believed in each other and Padio said they have players in the team who can step up and fill the void left by Waida.
Padio said the team executed what was expected from them by coach Frederica Sakette and the coaching staff.
“We followed the instructions of the coach and further we had this rope tied to our head to win this sixth gold medal,” said Padio.
From the match itself, the opening 45 minutes of play was an evenly contested encounter.
Fiji kept mounting pressure on PNG with their quick passing style of play but the defensive efforts of Olivia Upaupa, goalkeeper Faith Kasiray, Georgina Bakani and Rumona Morris shut them down.
The only change in the tempo came from when PNG’s Phylis Pala scored the only goal of the first half for PNG to lead 1-0 to half-time.
Several opportunities swayed, however, Kasiray held firm, as did her counterpart at the other end.
From the resumption of play, fatigue from the one-week competition kicked in and started to affect the Fijians defense, with the smaller PNG women taking full advantage.
PNG ran riot from left to right with Padio and Morris dictating the offence in the midfield.
Coach Frederica Sakette and assistant coach Erickson Komeng were both vocal on the sideline to maintain the pressure as they could see the Fijians struggling to manage PNGs counter-attack.
Finally a Marie Kaipu solo effort off the back of good team build-up saw her outpace three Fijian defenders and the goalkeeper before nudging the ball to take a handy 2-0 lead.
The Fijians were by then physically drained and were basically running on empty.
Kaipu by this time was having fun and was not long before she landed her second goal and then Calista Maneo the fourth to silence the vocal Fijian crowd and bench.
Fiji could only manage to score one goal, as PNG totally dismantled their normally well oiled outfit, to pull off another historical gold medal milestone.
The PNG women have now won the prestigious Pacific Games title since its inception in 2003 in Fiji, next in Apia, Samoa in 2007, then in New Caledonia in 2011, in Port Moresby in 2015, back to Apia in 2019 and then Honiara in 2023.
Previous coaches were the likes of Steven Mune, Francis Moyap and Garry Philips that have ensured that reign for the past 24 years.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-high-commissioner-to-solomon-islands-hosts-team-png/

PNG High Commissioner to Solomon Islands hosts Team PNG - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
THE PNG High Commissioner to Solomon Islands, Moses Kaul and the PNG community in Honiara hosted a ‘Welcome Kaikai’ for Team PNG.
Sports Minister Don Polye, was also present to give his welcome speech and advised the athletes to play with peace but aim for gold.
This special gathering was enlightened with a Manus Dance led by the PNG children and their parents living in Honiara.
“I hosted this get together with the PNG community here in Honiara to bring us all together, and wish them well before they all get busy with the Games,” Mr Kaul said.
Polye told the team to have peace in their hearts, play with love but aim for Gold for the country.
He said PNG has been winning gold in many other aspects, not only in Sports.
“Don’t worry about winning, just have peace in your heart, love yourself, love your lungs, your heart, your body, your knees and the joints and mind,” Polye said.
“You relax and love yourself, you do not be afraid, do not worry, ado not have anxiety, have peace in you. Don’t worry about how I am going to run…you don’t have to worry about winning gold or bronze because PNG you have already won many things, sports is not only about winning a medal, its also about winning other things, discipline and be competitive to be selected among many other things for you to be in the PNG Team,” he said.
Tagged: Honiara, PNG High Commissioner to Solomon Islands Moses Kaul, Sports Minister Don Polye 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-mens-volleyball-gives-png-first-win/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Team PNG shined in the opener against Tuvalu and ended up winning 3 sets.
The team started with a high against the opposing side, never backing down as they ended up winning the first set.
Second set saw Tuvalu coming back with a fighting spirit but didn’t hinder the PNG boys has they stuck throughout and ended up victors.
Despite a newer side with nine players making their debut, they all stood up to the court and made Papua New Guinea proud with taking home their first win.
Coach Matthew Walo was proud of his team’s performance and their first win.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/pmv-and-png/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PMV is the abbreviation for Passenger Motor Vehicle. That is the common passenger carrying permit issued by MVIL.
It is a common abbreviation that has become a word used for public or passenger motor vehicles across the nation. Its business history is old then the independence history of the nation of PNG.
As far as memory can recollect, PMV’s has been moving this nation’s economy since 1950, 5 years after the war.
My Dad had an old Japanese troop Jeep that was left after the war which he fixed and used as a PMV.
PMV’s rise each morning as early as 3 am and shuts down as late as 12midnight. PMV’s have been part and partial of this nations historic development to date. As a young boy growing up, I learned the mechanics of a PMV business from my Dad.
The first passengers for my dad’s PMV runs very early each day were the air and sea travelers.
They needed to be at the airports and seaports for their early departures.
After those runs, dad’s PMV, by then he had bought a long body green Dyna truck and built wooden seats, would ferry day students to schools.
After the school runs, the PMV would leave the urban boundary for rural passengers since the buses buses were unable to undertake the rough rural roads.
Main cargo to be moved from the rural communities were fresh garden foods for the urban markets.
Many mothers preferred to begin their journey to the urban markets as early as 5am in the morning, so that they can secure the better selling pots at the markets.
Dad was illiterate so he used an old Japanese custom of tying knots to a rope he kept to remind him of the bookings made for his PMV to transport goods to the markets or hire pickups.
Hire pick-ups consist of copra or cocoa bags which were transported to the Copra Marketing Board warehouse or Cocoa Marketing Board for quality checks and repacking for exports. Old habits die hard.It’s been seventy-three years after Dad used an old Jeep as a PMV.
The PMV history, progress and habits has not changed much except in the type of vehicles used. Roads and bridges remain rough, and until passengers get into the urban boundary, they do not have the luxury of any comfortable travelling in buses.
PNG’s history and progress will remain entrenched with the movement of cargo, business and people with PMVs.
The character, style and business habits of PMV’s is the same from West Sepik to Milne Bay to Gulf and inland throughout the Highlands region.
Today’s PMVs are laden with poultry, livestock, garden produce, betel nut, root crops, working class, travelling class, building materials, students etc,.. entering and leaving the city each and every day.
The PMV has been and remains the backbone of moving domestic cargo, subsistence agriculture, wounded, dying and dead, tourists, party goers, church worshippers, social events as well as business events, from sunset to sunrise in lightning, thunder, wind and rain for decades.
The nation, on a micro-economic scale has been and still is being moved by the PMV.PMV’s are the silent and silhouetted regiment of citizens that will never stop moving this nation forward.
Habits may change, the face of the PMV may change, but their needs and service will be needed for eternity. Image if the PMV’s stop running.
PNG should consider a PMV Festival or better still, a Holiday to celebrate the PMV’s immense contribution to nation building.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-is-blessed/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
OPPORTUNITY is a big word. It knocks on your door if you are lucky. If you are unlucky, it will not knock on the door but will hang in the “AIR”…take it or leave it.
Choice is yours. Fact is. It comes only once. If you do not take it, it passes and evaporates and will not return in the form and shape it did.
PNG sits Geo-Politically blessed, now than it ever did. It has become a centre of attraction between Australia and China.
Stepping back in time, between December 7th 1941 until September 2nd 1945, another Asian country was engaged in a regional crusade to take control of the pacific and PNG became its entry and exit in that era.
Its desire was to compete with the industrialised nations of western Europe and the United States.
Other non-guilty but responsible nations mentioned by recorded history in the pacific crusade were Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, China, France and the Soviet Union.Caught with their pants down, was the unfortunate pacific people and the main landmass utilised during that crusade was PNG, a Colony during that “’patch of grass’’ era.
Seventy-eight years later, forty-eight of which as an Independent sovereign nation, the landmass known as PNG again sits as a bridge of another tussle, an economic tussle. 
PNG needed a shake to alert United Nations after the pacific tussle that the nation needed sovereignty so that the fuzzy wuzzy’s can take control of their own political destiny.
A champion political Knight appeared in his shining armour and pursued political independence which landed on PNG’s laps on 16th September 1975.
Beyond that era, PNG is craving for another Knight with an economic armour that can enable Papua New Guinea to develop itself with much needed physical infrastructure across the whole country that will enable BUSINESS and TRADE to prosper.PNG needs it.
A war that is opportune. Its timing is very right and necessary that the nation’s young generation managers must ensure that national sovereignty is not compromised in this “LOOK NORTH” commercial interest.
PNG needs it, not so much in an invasion type relationship, but selected economic investments across the country, not just Port Moresby.
The nation has recently signed a defence agreement with United States and more recently visited China a short distance to the North, for the economic opportunities that is available.
PNG was responding to a formal invitation by China to attend the Third Belt and Road Forum for International Development and Cooperation. A package bundle that is worth billions of Kina.
PNG signed agreements to receive China’s financial assistance targeting Economics, trade Enhancement, Education and other fluid bundle of “As is where is’’ financial assistance.
While the Roundtable News Desk in London, quoted a former PNG Diplomat in London who described this whole development as “two elephants playing on a patch of grass and its people are that patch of grass” is a very realistic perception. 
The quote went on to describe the December 1941 to September 1945 pacific conflict crusade as a comparison of Papua New Guineans as by-standers, it will be fair and just to say that, back then the “patch of grass were by-standers.”
Not anymore. That “patch of grass” is now fully grown and fortunately have prickles after 78 years of experience with forty-eight years of it as a sovereignty with an identity and backbone.
It’s time to play our blessings as the bridge, not over river Kwai this time BUT strategically and geo-politically connecting the East to the West across the south pacific trade route.
It’s a blessing by making, not by default. It’s the country’s blessing.
This time, no colonialist will be dictating but Papua New Guineans taking charge of its own destiny as that “patch of grass”.
When the nation feels that any of the elephants are stamping too hard, all it needs to do is prickle its feet and the elephant will feel the pinch.
The economic opportunity is right and now to progress the nation. PNG must take it.
Tagged: Australia and China., LOOK NORTH, PNG, PNG Diplomat in London, simple living 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-next-in-line/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The North Sydney Bears losing $11 million in promised NSW government funding has put PNG in the box seat to be named the 18th NRL side.
The funding promised by Dom Perrottet’s ousted Liberal government in the lead up to this year’s state election has been scrapped by new Labour premier Chris Minns.
On the other hand, the federal government has financially backed PNG to join the NRL in a move made by Prime Minister Anthony Albanese to improve international relations.
PNG Prime Minister James Marape asked the Australian Government for an NRL team by 2025 to mark the 50th anniversary of his country’s independence – and Albanese is determined to deliver it.
Albanese wants a Port Moresby-based team, with games to also be played in Cairns, as a way to counter China’s growing influence in the region.
Australia’s Pacific Minister Pat Conroy in July committed $5.5 million to help PNG prepare a business case for their NRL bid and develop a pipeline of players.
Albanese has reportedly indicated privately that his government is prepared to help underwrite a team with up to $25 million a year from the foreign aid budget.
The PNG Hunters joined the Queensland Cup in 2014 and won the title 2017 – the same year the national side made the quarterfinals of the Rugby League World Cup.
PNG hosted the Australia’s PM’s XIII in Port Moresby last month and the Kumuls more than held their own against a side full of NRL stars.
They then thrashed the Cook Islands last weekend in their Pacific Championships opener as PNG’s expansion bid builds serious momentum.
Andrew Hill is the lead consultant for PNG’s bid and told foxsports.com.au that the Australian government support was a “game changer”.
“The bid itself is not being run an individual but by the government of PNG,” Hill said.
“It could (go ahead without Albanese’s support) but there’s no doubt having both the Australian and the PNG government involved is a game changer.”
On the back of the Dolphins successful entry in the NRL this year, there were reports on Thursday that the Kumuls could join the competition as soon as 2025.
But Hill emphasised, however, that whoever wins the next NRL licence, it would only be announced by 2025 and the side would enter the NRL closer to 2027.
The Australia Government in August announced it would tip in $7 million to help fund the inaugural Pacific Championship, a tournament involving men’s and women’s teams from Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, New Zealand, Samoa, Papua New Guinea and Tonga.
The bid team are focusing on an outright PNG team, but a Pasifika model is also being considered.
Samoa and Parramatta captain Junior Paulo has previously said he would play for a Pasifika NRL side.
“While we think rugby league in the Pacific is far stronger, it gives us the confidence to discuss what a Pacific team may look like.
“Obviously PNG would be leading those discussions, but clearly the genuine goal of the PNG government is to get more content in PNG and a licence based there.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/page/3/?s=png

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Rising high in the morning sun ahead of Independence Boulevard is the heartbeat of the nation, the National Parliament House of Papua New Guinea.
The Special Olympics Papua New Guinea Team returned to the country with four gold medals yesterday after competing at the 2023 World Summer Games in Berlin, Germany.
PNG Angels provide children and young adults in PNG with access to life-saving neurosurgeries.
Recently I caught up with a childhood friend of mine at the University of Goroka.
Solomon Islanders have and will greatly benefit from the Solomon Islands Football Academy funded by Papua New Guinea, it’s government and people worth K20 million.
BOUGAINVILLE President Ishmael Toroama says the Late Great Grand Chief Sir Michael Thomas Somare always described Bougainville as an integral part of Papua New Guinea.
PNG table tennis team are taking the opening two days of their competition by storm.
French President Emmanuel Macron has kicked off his Pacific visit yesterday starting with New Caledonia, then Vanuatu and en-route Papua New Guinea end of this week.
Justin Olam: Papua New Guinea’s official tourism brand ambassador 
PNG Tourism promotion authority CEO Eric Mossman Uvovo yesterday officially announced PNG international and Melbourne Storm centre Justin Olam as the PNG’s tourism brand ambassador.
Benson Nomu from Harile village, West New Britain Province joined athletics at the age of 12 when his school hosted carnivals and sporting events not knowing that athletics would take him to the national level.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/christianity-in-png/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Prime Minister James Marape flew out last Sunday to Jerusalem hoping to boost foreign investment and to strengthen the Christian bond between Israel and Papua New Guinea.
With a delegation comprised of church and business leaders, PM Marape officially open the new embassy in Jerusalem, in response to local church groups that have lobbied for a firmer relationship with Israel for so long.
When PM Marape was in Israel, news broke out that a Christian prayer warrior back home, “using the name of the Lord, started performing a prayer ritual and was describing and naming people in the village who she claimed had satanic powers and were killing and causing people to get sick, have bad luck and struggle in finding education, finding jobs and doing business”.
Upon the prayer warrior’s words, a community in Bulolo, Morobe Province, went bonkers and tortured a 39-year-old mother to her death. She was suspected of possessing satanic powers and of being a witch.
It is hard to accept that such a barbaric killing should occur in Morobe, the stronghold of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, which has quickly condemned the killing.
PNG joined a handful of countries that have established embassies in Jerusalem, following the commitment by PM Marape on the National Prayer and Repentance Day on August 26.
He also told the country a law would be introduced to officially make PNG a Christian country.
The Government envisaged that a close relationship with Israel is essential for PNG’s aspirations in economy, agriculture, health and technology and a recognition of Israel’s claim to Jerusalem as its capital based on biblical and secular history.
We will have to wait to see the Palestinians, who claim Jerusalem as their territory, will react. We all should know about the feud between Israel and Palestine if we are Christians because the feud is ancient.
Australia and Britian had to withdraw their plans to set up embassies in Jerusalem, when Palestine protested, describing the move as a “blatant violation of international law”.
If by moving into Jerusalem, we anticipate divine intervention to really change the attitudes and behaviours of our people towards the escalating tortures and killings from sorcery related accusations, the gender-based violence and the tribal conflicts as well as the general lawlessness here, hopefully we see some miracles soon.
While we wait, we have to ask some critical questions as Christians. Where is the love? Where is the respect? Where is justice?
The Christian religion was introduced into PNG in the 1800s and by the 1930s, the early missionaries were all over the country, establishing churches and spreading the word of God.
Today the bible and its teachings are as old as the country and in our view, there is no need to preach about God or the Christian faith anymore. We believe in Him or we don’t, its simple as that.
How can our Churches in PNG contribute to a peaceful, united and prosperous PNG? This is the big question our churches here must ask themselves today, as we grapple with the challenges facing us.
Whatever is happening around the country may be happening because our people have lost their faith in God.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/page/2/?s=png

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Angela Dorothea Merkel was a German politician, who led her country as Chancellor from November 2005 to December 2021.
The Government’s flagship transport infrastructure program – Connect PNG – was rolled out in 2020.
Businesswomen , humanitarian and women’s advocate Monica Salter is PNG’s newest Dame.
The PNG Games Executive Committee in consultation with PNG Games Council Members has resolved to reschedule the 8th PNG Games again, pending respective Provincial Administrations’ assurances that key expenses will be met to ensure participation. This decision was reached when 18 provinces failed to convince the Games Organising Committee that they would show up at […]
The 7th Melanesian Arts and Culture Festival has come to an end as the PNG contingent arrived in Port Moresby last week Friday.
This weekend, thousands from the Evangelical Lutheran Church will converge on Ialibu station in Southern Highlands for the 34th Church Synod.
A Vocal Government MP has labelled the Connect PNG Program, the signature policy initiative of the Marape-Rosso Government, “misguided’ and should be halted with funds diverted to addressing key social programs in the country.
The Australian Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese arrived in Port Moresby and addressed the PNG Parliament early this year. His agenda for that visit was regional security and he expressed clearly Australia’s concern surrounding this matter very clearly.
In the representative democracy we have in this country, Parliament remains the ultimate body that makes laws as the legislator.
As Ben Ikin took his first steps towards a rugby league field in Papua New Guinea, the Queensland Rugby League chief executive officer instantly felt the nation’s immense passion for the game.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-at-a-glance/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
In TERMS of surface area PNG’s territory encompasses 462,840 square kilometers (sqkm) with a coastline stretching 5152sqkm dotted by 600 islands.We share a common border with the largest Muslim nation of the world, Indonesia that is 820km long.
The National Population Census of 2011 put PNG’s population at 7.28 million with a fast growing rate of 3.2 per cent per year. The challenge is to match the rate at which we are increasing in numbers with the ability to provide goods and service; that is govern adequately.
The sad story about gender equality is that women are expected to outlive men. According to the United Nations average life expectancy for women in PNG is 63.2 years compared to 58.5 years for men.Generally, the population is fairly young with a median age of just under 22 and an estimated 40 per cent under 15 years of age.
Forty-three per cent of the population is Highlands-based. Twenty-five per cent in Mamose, 18 per cent in Southern provinces and 14 per cent in the New Guinea Islands.To work out your region’s population, multiply thecountry’s total by your percentage and then divide by 100.
We keep referring to rural areas as places that are outside of cities. This is incorrect.
There are urban centres such as the provincial capitals and they have their town boundaries. Rural places are the villages and hamlets that are in the countryside – the mountains, the valleys, swamps, islands, rainforests, grasslands and coastline.Around 85 per cent of our people are to be found in these rural settings and they predominantly practise subsistence agriculture.According to the National Statistical Office, Port Moresby, the nation’s capital had 364,125 people in 2011. Lae, the second city to be established after Port Moresby reputedly had 200,000 and Mt Hagen, the third city, 400,000.
These figures cannot be trusted because PNG does not have a National Data Base and movement of people between provinces is very fluid. Port Moresby has become a hiding place for murderers escaping from their enemies in the Highlands.LANGUAGE
PNG is said to have more than 800 languages; there is no exact figure, just ‘over’ 800 and no language list has ever been found. Perhaps the national Data Base will show one day. But English is the official language and two other recognized lingua franca; Pidgin becoming the dominant language all over the country. The National carrier does not recognise this arrangement and excludes the use of Motu.RELIGION
There is no State religion. The Head of State, the British Monarch is Anglican but the Anglican church of PNG is one of the smallest Christian groups at around three per cent. The Constitution of the country allows freedom of religion. In its 2013 investment Climate Statement, the United States State Department said, the government of PNG welcomed foreign investment with a liberal investment regime.GOVERNMENT
The country is demarcated into four regions with 22 provinces within which are the National Capital District (NCD) and the Autonomous Region of Bougainville (ABG). The provinces are divided into 89 districts or electorates with 325 local government wards.The regions – Mamose, New Guinea Islands, Highlands and southern have no political representation while the provinces have elected governors.The National Parliament consists of 118 MPs who serve 5-year terms elected by universal suffrage under a Limited Preferential Voting system. This group is divided into 96 members of Parliament (MPs) elected from single member constituencies and 22 elected from single member provincial divisions. These divisions are the 18 provinces of PNG plus the ABG and NCD.MPs elected as provincial division representatives become governors of their provinces unless they are appointed as Minister to the National Executive Council in which case one of the constituency MP is elected to be the governor. But most prefer to be governor.The parliament is unicameral, meaning that Bills which pass a vote in the House do not need referral to an upper chamber, but can go directly into law. As a member of the Commonwealth, the country’s Head-of-State is the British monarch, represented by the governor-general who is elected by parliament for a 6-year term and may be re-elected only once, provided he or she secures a two-thirds majority vote.CLIMATE
Temperatures and rainfall are subject to the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone, the South Pacific Convergence Zone and the West Pacific Monsoon.PNG is the 12th most disaster-prone country in the world. Located in the Pacific ring of fire, the most seismically-active region of the planet, PNG is exposed to risks including earthquakes, tsunami, tropical cyclones, volcanic eruptions and systematic flooding.BIODIVERSITY
As hot as PNG is seismically, 4.5 per cent of the planet’s known mammals are found here. There are more than 800 species of birds rivaling the number of languages we speak and almost 300,000 vascular plants that supplement our oxygen tank.Thirty-eight of the world’s 42-known species of Birds-of-Paradise favour PNG as their country of choice, so does the planet’s biggest butterfly – the Queen Alexandra bird-wing. Joining them in the exclusive stakes area the largest specie of tree frog, pigeon and orchids. Twelve of the known 14 species of tree kangaroos are found in PNG and to top the list, the planet’s only- known poisonous bird.NATURAL RESOURCE
While minerals and hydrocarbon resource dominate exports, 85 per cent of the country’s population is employed in the agriculture sector accounting for around one –third of Gross Domestic Product or GDP which is a measurement of the permanent cash income of citizens.Our primary agriculture exports are coffee, tea, cocoa, copra and palm oil. PNG was world’s seventh- largest producer and third-largest exporter of palm oil in 2008, accounting for 1.3 per cent of global exports. We were the seventeenth largest producer of coffee in 2010 accounting for 0.7 per cent of global production.
According to the National Fisheries Authority, out total annual tuna catches averaged around 482,000 tonnes between 2006 and 2011, representing some eleven per cent of global catch.ISLAND HISTORY
While archaeological evidence of human habitation dates back 60,000 years, the first written records of life in the eastern half of Papua go back to the first European contact in 1526. The island of New Guinea is the second biggest in the world after Greenland.INVESTMENT
After 43 years of nationhood, PNG still hold s a special significance for Australians. Results from the Lowy institute’s 2015 Poll – Australia and the World – showed that Aussies feel a strong sense of obligation to PNG. Eighty-two per cent of Aussies agreed that stability in PNG was important to Australia’s national interest and 77 per cent said Australia had a moral obligation to help PNG.Australia is PNG’;s largest trading partner and largest source of foreign investment. PNG was forecast to be the world’s fastest growing economy in 2015 but only a minority (37 per cent) agreed that PNG had strong economic prospects.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

http://postcourier.com.pg

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Ling-Stuckey Benched The predicted Cabinet reshuffle occurred yesterday with Treasurer Ian Ling-Stuckey becoming the bombshell victim.
Govt increase funding by K93.6 million The government tuition fees funding for this year has increased by K93.6 million, according to the Education Secretary Dr Uke Kombra.
Daki out, Dr Joseph in as Defence minister Social Democratic Party members were all smiles yesterday as Deputy Leader for SDP and Nipa-Kutubu MP Dr Billy Joseph was named as the new PNG Defence Force Minister.
Youths with no school and job, I will find you: Marape Youths between the ages of 15 and 30, who have dropped out of school or with no jobs, I want your names, says Prime Minister James Marape.
Women’s group Donate fresh garden foods to CPL THE Enga Enda Anda women’s group in Enga province is the first from outside of Port Moresby to come forward and donate fresh garden foods to CPL group of companies…
Asia and the Pacific swap places According to the World Health Organization, Universal Health Coverage (UHC) requires that all people receive the promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative health services they need and can afford.
Pirate attacks on rise in Morobe waters Pirate attacks in the coastal waters of Morobe and Popondetta are becoming a concern. In the past five years, there have been incidences of pirates taking control of boats ferrying…
Application for school fee subsidy program open Applications are open for the Eastern Highlands governor’s tuition fee subsidy assistant program.
Dragons miss out again St George Illawarra’s recruitment drive has hit another snag after the Canberra Raiders rejected a release request from hooker Zac Woolford to immediately move to the Dragons.
US in new strikes against Houthi  The United States military said on Wednesday its forces conducted strikes on 14 Houthi missiles that were loaded to be fired from Yemen, in the fourth day of US…
Grabbing US$300 billion of Russian assets is no solution, West cautions Western officials said in Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday that they were open to the idea of confiscating U$300 billion (K1.1 trillion) of Russian assets to help Ukraine, but cautioned that…
US Treasury official discusses cholera outbreak, debt with Zambia The United States Treasury Department’s top international official spoke with Zambia’s finance minister on Wednesday and discussed Zambia’s ongoing debt restructuring and its response to a recent cholera outbreak, the…
Guatemalan ex-president barred from entering US Former Guatemalan President Alejandro Giammattei has been barred from entering the US over allegations of “his  involvement in significant corruption,” the State Department said on Wednesday.
Raki a star in the making The inaugural Kewabi Epari, Ialibu-Pangia Unity Cup has certainly unearted many hidden talents.
Wabo puts best foot forward If there is one push factor for PNG Hunters backline utility Sanny Wabo to retain a spot in the team, it would be his eight-month-old daughter, Ariel Sanny.
Doc clears Morea Morea Junior Good news coming out from the South Pacific Brewery sponsored PNG Hunters side is the return of injured fullback Morea Morea Jr.
Athletics PNG 2024 calendar Athletics PNG has released its 2024 Calendar of events with its main overseas event for the year being the Oceania Championships in Suva , Fiji, from June 4 to 8.
One dead in Kainantu ONE person has died and several homes burned as fighting erupted between the Isontenu & Puanano villages and the enemy tribe from Yauna, 8 & 9mile in Kainantu district, Eastern…
Use restraint and common sense CENTRAL police commander, Chief Inspector Laimo Aisi has called on police officers within his command to be “positive and restore the intergrity of the Constabulary”.
State of Emergency does not include curfew ACTING Police Commissioner Donald Yamasombi says there is no curfew in the recently announced 14 day State of Emergency in Port Moresby.
Security company warns hooligans The Night Owl Security Service has warned the hooligans to be wary of their impulsive looting on innocent targets.
Convention to help students grow in faith in Kundiawa THE Catholic Diocese of Kundiawa, for the first time, hosted the tertiary students’ formation convention aimed at helping students progress in the Catholic faith.
Kumul partners with Site Group to expand skills training Kumul Petroleum Holdings Limited through its training entity, the Kumul Petroleum Academy (KPA) is expanding its training capacity by building a new training facility next door to its fabrication facility.
Sepik Basin LOs seek answers on Nopan project Sepik Basin landowners are appealing to the government to clarify the progress of a petroleum exploration project in the region.
400,000 people to be impacted, says CPL CEO Approximately 400,000 people in the community that depend on Stop and Shop shops for everyday essentials are now impacted with the looting and damage of these shops in the National…
PNG joins global trade coalition Minister for International Trade and Investment, Richard Maru, while participating at the 54th annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland, has announced Papua New Guinea’s membership to…
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Ling-Stuckey Benched The predicted Cabinet reshuffle occurred yesterday with Treasurer Ian Ling-Stuckey becoming the bombshell victim.
Govt increase funding by K93.6 million The government tuition fees funding for this year has increased by K93.6 million, according to the Education Secretary Dr Uke Kombra.
Daki out, Dr Joseph in as Defence minister Social Democratic Party members were all smiles yesterday as Deputy Leader for SDP and Nipa-Kutubu MP Dr Billy Joseph was named as the new PNG Defence Force Minister.
Youths with no school and job, I will find you: Marape Youths between the ages of 15 and 30, who have dropped out of school or with no jobs, I want your names, says Prime Minister James Marape.
Women’s group Donate fresh garden foods to CPL THE Enga Enda Anda women’s group in Enga province is the first from outside of Port Moresby to come forward and donate fresh garden foods to CPL group of companies…
Asia and the Pacific swap places According to the World Health Organization, Universal Health Coverage (UHC) requires that all people receive the promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative health services they need and can afford.
Pirate attacks on rise in Morobe waters Pirate attacks in the coastal waters of Morobe and Popondetta are becoming a concern. In the past five years, there have been incidences of pirates taking control of boats ferrying…
Application for school fee subsidy program open Applications are open for the Eastern Highlands governor’s tuition fee subsidy assistant program.
Dragons miss out again St George Illawarra’s recruitment drive has hit another snag after the Canberra Raiders rejected a release request from hooker Zac Woolford to immediately move to the Dragons.
US in new strikes against Houthi  The United States military said on Wednesday its forces conducted strikes on 14 Houthi missiles that were loaded to be fired from Yemen, in the fourth day of US…
Grabbing US$300 billion of Russian assets is no solution, West cautions Western officials said in Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday that they were open to the idea of confiscating U$300 billion (K1.1 trillion) of Russian assets to help Ukraine, but cautioned that…
US Treasury official discusses cholera outbreak, debt with Zambia The United States Treasury Department’s top international official spoke with Zambia’s finance minister on Wednesday and discussed Zambia’s ongoing debt restructuring and its response to a recent cholera outbreak, the…
Guatemalan ex-president barred from entering US Former Guatemalan President Alejandro Giammattei has been barred from entering the US over allegations of “his  involvement in significant corruption,” the State Department said on Wednesday.
Raki a star in the making The inaugural Kewabi Epari, Ialibu-Pangia Unity Cup has certainly unearted many hidden talents.
Wabo puts best foot forward If there is one push factor for PNG Hunters backline utility Sanny Wabo to retain a spot in the team, it would be his eight-month-old daughter, Ariel Sanny.
Doc clears Morea Morea Junior Good news coming out from the South Pacific Brewery sponsored PNG Hunters side is the return of injured fullback Morea Morea Jr.
Athletics PNG 2024 calendar Athletics PNG has released its 2024 Calendar of events with its main overseas event for the year being the Oceania Championships in Suva , Fiji, from June 4 to 8.
One dead in Kainantu ONE person has died and several homes burned as fighting erupted between the Isontenu & Puanano villages and the enemy tribe from Yauna, 8 & 9mile in Kainantu district, Eastern…
Use restraint and common sense CENTRAL police commander, Chief Inspector Laimo Aisi has called on police officers within his command to be “positive and restore the intergrity of the Constabulary”.
State of Emergency does not include curfew ACTING Police Commissioner Donald Yamasombi says there is no curfew in the recently announced 14 day State of Emergency in Port Moresby.
Security company warns hooligans The Night Owl Security Service has warned the hooligans to be wary of their impulsive looting on innocent targets.
Convention to help students grow in faith in Kundiawa THE Catholic Diocese of Kundiawa, for the first time, hosted the tertiary students’ formation convention aimed at helping students progress in the Catholic faith.
Kumul partners with Site Group to expand skills training Kumul Petroleum Holdings Limited through its training entity, the Kumul Petroleum Academy (KPA) is expanding its training capacity by building a new training facility next door to its fabrication facility.
Sepik Basin LOs seek answers on Nopan project Sepik Basin landowners are appealing to the government to clarify the progress of a petroleum exploration project in the region.
400,000 people to be impacted, says CPL CEO Approximately 400,000 people in the community that depend on Stop and Shop shops for everyday essentials are now impacted with the looting and damage of these shops in the National…
PNG joins global trade coalition Minister for International Trade and Investment, Richard Maru, while participating at the 54th annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland, has announced Papua New Guinea’s membership to…
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/18-provinces-confirmed-for-png-games/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The 8th PNG Games set to be hosted in Port Moresby has lured 18 provincial teams confirming their participation.PNG Sports Foundation CEO Albert Veratau said to date 18 provinces have confirmed participation by means of accreditation via the online registration portal.“Eighteen provinces are quite a lot and the four that are yet to register are; Enga, East Sepik, Madang and East New Britain,” said Veratau.
Veratau urged all provinces to be part of the Games as it is an integral part of PNG, saying; “that is why they are obliged to join in on the celebrations and exhibit provincial culture and pride enhancing National Unity and thus the theme of the 8th PNG Games is ‘Unity and Pride.”He said they are working closely with the PNG Olympic Committee, 11 Sporting Federations and NCDC to run the 8th PNG Games.“The eleven sports federation have been very positive and are excited to be a part of games organising committee,” he said.He said currently there is a total of 4,720 games participants that have already been accredited, but the tally is expected to increase to 6,000 when the remaining four provinces complete their registration later this month.“The new total will be close to the Honiara Pacific Games numbers,” said Veratau.He said now it all falls on the shoulders of the GOC as they have a daunting task to manage the 300 sports and general volunteers, 350 technical officials and 400 security personnel that brings the total up to 1,050 to provide assistance during the course of the Games.“I salute the 22 provincial governments and the 96 district development authorities for recognising the value sports adds to nation building by supporting the youths to proudly wear their respective provincial colours to this sporting event,” said Veratau.He also extended invitation to all government agencies and, NGO’s, business organisations and development partners to come forward and set up stalls at all the sporting venues to showcase their products and deliver awareness to those participating in the Games.“About 200,000 people are expected to visit the game venues over the 10 days kicking off with the opening ceremony on 10th January 2024.”
Tagged: 8th PNG Games, Albert Veratau, PNG Sports Foundation 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/new-category/png-top-stories/page/2/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Ling-Stuckey says message from businesses was received ‘loud and clear’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/new-category/png-top-stories/page/3/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-games-rescheduled/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The PNG Games Executive Committee in consultation with PNG Games Council Members has resolved to reschedule the 8th PNG Games again, pending respective Provincial Administrations’ assurances that key expenses will be met to ensure participation.
This decision was reached when 18 provinces failed to convince the Games Organising Committee that they would show up at the Games earmarked for delivery from 10th-20th January 2024.
As of 29th December 2023; feedback from Provincial teams revealed that only Team Manus and Team Milne Bay have secured plane tickets to fly into Port Moresby, Team Gulf secured buses to travel by road to the host City to join Team Central and Team NCD.
Four provinces out of the 22 provinces did not meet the minimum requirement to participate.
With less than two weeks before the Opening Ceremony, most provinces were still fundraising to secure sufficient funds to fly their teams to Port Moresby.
The Games Organising Committee had no choice but to request the Council Executive Committee give the provincial teams more time to source sufficient funds to budget for travel, accommodation, meals, uniforms, and other costs.
In endorsing the decision; Albert Veratau, the Chairman of the PNG Games Council acknowledged the National Sporting Bodies, National Capital District Commission, and National Cultural Commission for supporting PNG Sports Foundation in delivering the Games.
He also thanked the hardworking provincial team management, coaches, and fundraising committees for exhibiting exceptional commitment and resilience to put provincial teams together during the past six months.
There is now a call out by the Council for all provincial governments to support their provincial teams.
The PNG Games has impacted the lives of thousands of citizens in all provinces spread across two generations.
Since it’s a recognized national event the national government is obliged to appropriate separate funding for the delivery of the Games including travel subsidy for provincial teams as was done for the 5th PNG Games in 2012, in Kokopo East New Britain Province.
In the New Year, the Council will host a PNG Games Seminar in Port with the objective being to review the Games including the charter. 
This will be the first time in 20 years for the Games to be evaluated since its inception in 2003.
Invitations will be sent out to prominent sports investors including Sir Peter Ipatas and Tony Green PNGOC senior vice president to speak at the seminar followed by general discussions and resolutions for the way forward.
Tagged: PNG Games, PNG Games Executive Committee, PNG Sports Federation 
‘All secondary teachers must have a provisional registration certificate’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-is-the-core-of-melanesia/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The 7th Melanesian Arts and Culture Festival has come to an end as the PNG contingent arrived in Port Moresby last week Friday.
Minister for Arts, Tourism and Culture Isi Henry Leonard highlighted that as the big brother among the Melanesian countries, PNG brought life to the festival in every sense.
“Prior to our arrival, the festival felt incomplete by most of the participating countries. When PNG arrived and took the stage, the event was brought to life as the big brother country stormed in with multiple exquisite traditional performance, displaying the strength and spirit of Melanesian brotherhood,” he said.
“In our absence, their numbers were small and the diversity was limited. But as soon as we arrived, you could see how our presence lifted the spirits of our brothers and sisters from the other side and we all showcased our culture brilliantly to the rest of the World who were present at the event.”
“PNG is the core of Melanesia that holds our people together as one. As the big brother we must do our best and take lead wherever we can, to preserve our people, culture and our Melanesian way of life.”
The contingent of performers who represented PNG in Vanuatu included traditional groups from Bougainville, West New Britain, Hela, East New Britain and stage performers from the UPNG Arts faculty.
PNG had the biggest contingent apart from the other Melanesian countries who were present including Fiji, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands.
The PNG contingent”, however, missed the opening ceremony and arrived four days late due to delays in the allocation of funds.
Mr Leonard said the other Melanesian countries have also expressed their gratitude to PNG.
“I would like to commend the National Cultural Commission and the government who were supportive to make this all possible, including SoE Minister William Duma and Air Niugini.“I would also like to thank our participants who represented their country with pride,” he said.
“Culture is a significant part of our country and people, therefore we must all do our best to preserve, promote and practice it wherever we can.
“Our culture defines us as Papua New Guineans and Melanesians, which gives us our unique identity from the rest of the world.”
He further added that engagement in the cultural space is good for sectors such as tourism and investment, which is beneficial for the economy of the four Melanesian states.
“Our culture is also under threat from other cultures that are being introduced. We must do more of these cultural activities not only to protect them, but attract foreigners as well.
Melanesians are unique from the rest of the world and this is the stage where we showcase ourselves,” he said.
Tagged: Melanesian Arts and Culture Festival, Melanesian countries, Minister for Arts, National Cultural Commission, Papua New Guineans, Tourism and Culture Isi Henry Leonard, UPNG Arts faculty 
‘All secondary teachers must have a provisional registration certificate’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

