https://www.postcourier.com.pg/wheels-are-turning-for-png/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PNG Chamber Of Resources and Energy President, Anthony Smare is giving his introductory remarks reminding the businesses that the wheels are turning for PNG in terms of resources and energy.
He further stated that for this year’s conference it is the biggest and the value of the conference is to get everyone involved in investment in one room.
“This conference provides the perfect venue for serendipity to happen, please visit the booths and connect with one and another.”
Read more in your Post-Courier tomorrow – Tuesday, December 12, 2023.
Tagged: PNG Chamber Of Resources and Energy President Anthony Smare, Prime Minister James Marape 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-continues-dominance/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Loyalty is what PNG women’s football team skipper Ramona Padio best describes their 6th gold medal win against Fiji on Friday night.
In front of a packed Solomon Islands National Stadium, Padio led the team to another stunning performance to defeat the shattered Fijians 4-1. 
Prior to attending the 17th Pacific Games, Padio confidently said with confidence during Team PNG’s farewell function at the Sir John Guise stadium in Port Moresby that they will retain the gold medal.
“I publicly announced that we will win the gold medal. We fulfilled our dream of bringing the gold medal back to PNG,” said Padio.
The unavailability of central defender Serah Waida due to conceding a red card following the 5-1 semifinal win over Samoa, saw the players feeling down that she (Waida) will not play in the gold medal play off.
Mentally the players believed in each other and Padio said they have players in the team who can step up and fill the void left by Waida.
Padio said the team executed what was expected from them by coach Frederica Sakette and the coaching staff.
“We followed the instructions of the coach and further we had this rope tied to our head to win this sixth gold medal,” said Padio.
From the match itself, the opening 45 minutes of play was an evenly contested encounter.
Fiji kept mounting pressure on PNG with their quick passing style of play but the defensive efforts of Olivia Upaupa, goalkeeper Faith Kasiray, Georgina Bakani and Rumona Morris shut them down.
The only change in the tempo came from when PNG’s Phylis Pala scored the only goal of the first half for PNG to lead 1-0 to half-time.
Several opportunities swayed, however, Kasiray held firm, as did her counterpart at the other end.
From the resumption of play, fatigue from the one-week competition kicked in and started to affect the Fijians defense, with the smaller PNG women taking full advantage.
PNG ran riot from left to right with Padio and Morris dictating the offence in the midfield.
Coach Frederica Sakette and assistant coach Erickson Komeng were both vocal on the sideline to maintain the pressure as they could see the Fijians struggling to manage PNGs counter-attack.
Finally a Marie Kaipu solo effort off the back of good team build-up saw her outpace three Fijian defenders and the goalkeeper before nudging the ball to take a handy 2-0 lead.
The Fijians were by then physically drained and were basically running on empty.
Kaipu by this time was having fun and was not long before she landed her second goal and then Calista Maneo the fourth to silence the vocal Fijian crowd and bench.
Fiji could only manage to score one goal, as PNG totally dismantled their normally well oiled outfit, to pull off another historical gold medal milestone.
The PNG women have now won the prestigious Pacific Games title since its inception in 2003 in Fiji, next in Apia, Samoa in 2007, then in New Caledonia in 2011, in Port Moresby in 2015, back to Apia in 2019 and then Honiara in 2023.
Previous coaches were the likes of Steven Mune, Francis Moyap and Garry Philips that have ensured that reign for the past 24 years.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-high-commissioner-to-solomon-islands-hosts-team-png/

PNG High Commissioner to Solomon Islands hosts Team PNG - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
THE PNG High Commissioner to Solomon Islands, Moses Kaul and the PNG community in Honiara hosted a ‘Welcome Kaikai’ for Team PNG.
Sports Minister Don Polye, was also present to give his welcome speech and advised the athletes to play with peace but aim for gold.
This special gathering was enlightened with a Manus Dance led by the PNG children and their parents living in Honiara.
“I hosted this get together with the PNG community here in Honiara to bring us all together, and wish them well before they all get busy with the Games,” Mr Kaul said.
Polye told the team to have peace in their hearts, play with love but aim for Gold for the country.
He said PNG has been winning gold in many other aspects, not only in Sports.
“Don’t worry about winning, just have peace in your heart, love yourself, love your lungs, your heart, your body, your knees and the joints and mind,” Polye said.
“You relax and love yourself, you do not be afraid, do not worry, ado not have anxiety, have peace in you. Don’t worry about how I am going to run…you don’t have to worry about winning gold or bronze because PNG you have already won many things, sports is not only about winning a medal, its also about winning other things, discipline and be competitive to be selected among many other things for you to be in the PNG Team,” he said.
Tagged: Honiara, PNG High Commissioner to Solomon Islands Moses Kaul, Sports Minister Don Polye 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-mens-volleyball-gives-png-first-win/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Team PNG shined in the opener against Tuvalu and ended up winning 3 sets.
The team started with a high against the opposing side, never backing down as they ended up winning the first set.
Second set saw Tuvalu coming back with a fighting spirit but didn’t hinder the PNG boys has they stuck throughout and ended up victors.
Despite a newer side with nine players making their debut, they all stood up to the court and made Papua New Guinea proud with taking home their first win.
Coach Matthew Walo was proud of his team’s performance and their first win.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/pmv-and-png/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PMV is the abbreviation for Passenger Motor Vehicle. That is the common passenger carrying permit issued by MVIL.
It is a common abbreviation that has become a word used for public or passenger motor vehicles across the nation. Its business history is old then the independence history of the nation of PNG.
As far as memory can recollect, PMV’s has been moving this nation’s economy since 1950, 5 years after the war.
My Dad had an old Japanese troop Jeep that was left after the war which he fixed and used as a PMV.
PMV’s rise each morning as early as 3 am and shuts down as late as 12midnight. PMV’s have been part and partial of this nations historic development to date. As a young boy growing up, I learned the mechanics of a PMV business from my Dad.
The first passengers for my dad’s PMV runs very early each day were the air and sea travelers.
They needed to be at the airports and seaports for their early departures.
After those runs, dad’s PMV, by then he had bought a long body green Dyna truck and built wooden seats, would ferry day students to schools.
After the school runs, the PMV would leave the urban boundary for rural passengers since the buses buses were unable to undertake the rough rural roads.
Main cargo to be moved from the rural communities were fresh garden foods for the urban markets.
Many mothers preferred to begin their journey to the urban markets as early as 5am in the morning, so that they can secure the better selling pots at the markets.
Dad was illiterate so he used an old Japanese custom of tying knots to a rope he kept to remind him of the bookings made for his PMV to transport goods to the markets or hire pickups.
Hire pick-ups consist of copra or cocoa bags which were transported to the Copra Marketing Board warehouse or Cocoa Marketing Board for quality checks and repacking for exports. Old habits die hard.It’s been seventy-three years after Dad used an old Jeep as a PMV.
The PMV history, progress and habits has not changed much except in the type of vehicles used. Roads and bridges remain rough, and until passengers get into the urban boundary, they do not have the luxury of any comfortable travelling in buses.
PNG’s history and progress will remain entrenched with the movement of cargo, business and people with PMVs.
The character, style and business habits of PMV’s is the same from West Sepik to Milne Bay to Gulf and inland throughout the Highlands region.
Today’s PMVs are laden with poultry, livestock, garden produce, betel nut, root crops, working class, travelling class, building materials, students etc,.. entering and leaving the city each and every day.
The PMV has been and remains the backbone of moving domestic cargo, subsistence agriculture, wounded, dying and dead, tourists, party goers, church worshippers, social events as well as business events, from sunset to sunrise in lightning, thunder, wind and rain for decades.
The nation, on a micro-economic scale has been and still is being moved by the PMV.PMV’s are the silent and silhouetted regiment of citizens that will never stop moving this nation forward.
Habits may change, the face of the PMV may change, but their needs and service will be needed for eternity. Image if the PMV’s stop running.
PNG should consider a PMV Festival or better still, a Holiday to celebrate the PMV’s immense contribution to nation building.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-is-blessed/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
OPPORTUNITY is a big word. It knocks on your door if you are lucky. If you are unlucky, it will not knock on the door but will hang in the “AIR”…take it or leave it.
Choice is yours. Fact is. It comes only once. If you do not take it, it passes and evaporates and will not return in the form and shape it did.
PNG sits Geo-Politically blessed, now than it ever did. It has become a centre of attraction between Australia and China.
Stepping back in time, between December 7th 1941 until September 2nd 1945, another Asian country was engaged in a regional crusade to take control of the pacific and PNG became its entry and exit in that era.
Its desire was to compete with the industrialised nations of western Europe and the United States.
Other non-guilty but responsible nations mentioned by recorded history in the pacific crusade were Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, China, France and the Soviet Union.Caught with their pants down, was the unfortunate pacific people and the main landmass utilised during that crusade was PNG, a Colony during that “’patch of grass’’ era.
Seventy-eight years later, forty-eight of which as an Independent sovereign nation, the landmass known as PNG again sits as a bridge of another tussle, an economic tussle. 
PNG needed a shake to alert United Nations after the pacific tussle that the nation needed sovereignty so that the fuzzy wuzzy’s can take control of their own political destiny.
A champion political Knight appeared in his shining armour and pursued political independence which landed on PNG’s laps on 16th September 1975.
Beyond that era, PNG is craving for another Knight with an economic armour that can enable Papua New Guinea to develop itself with much needed physical infrastructure across the whole country that will enable BUSINESS and TRADE to prosper.PNG needs it.
A war that is opportune. Its timing is very right and necessary that the nation’s young generation managers must ensure that national sovereignty is not compromised in this “LOOK NORTH” commercial interest.
PNG needs it, not so much in an invasion type relationship, but selected economic investments across the country, not just Port Moresby.
The nation has recently signed a defence agreement with United States and more recently visited China a short distance to the North, for the economic opportunities that is available.
PNG was responding to a formal invitation by China to attend the Third Belt and Road Forum for International Development and Cooperation. A package bundle that is worth billions of Kina.
PNG signed agreements to receive China’s financial assistance targeting Economics, trade Enhancement, Education and other fluid bundle of “As is where is’’ financial assistance.
While the Roundtable News Desk in London, quoted a former PNG Diplomat in London who described this whole development as “two elephants playing on a patch of grass and its people are that patch of grass” is a very realistic perception. 
The quote went on to describe the December 1941 to September 1945 pacific conflict crusade as a comparison of Papua New Guineans as by-standers, it will be fair and just to say that, back then the “patch of grass were by-standers.”
Not anymore. That “patch of grass” is now fully grown and fortunately have prickles after 78 years of experience with forty-eight years of it as a sovereignty with an identity and backbone.
It’s time to play our blessings as the bridge, not over river Kwai this time BUT strategically and geo-politically connecting the East to the West across the south pacific trade route.
It’s a blessing by making, not by default. It’s the country’s blessing.
This time, no colonialist will be dictating but Papua New Guineans taking charge of its own destiny as that “patch of grass”.
When the nation feels that any of the elephants are stamping too hard, all it needs to do is prickle its feet and the elephant will feel the pinch.
The economic opportunity is right and now to progress the nation. PNG must take it.
Tagged: Australia and China., LOOK NORTH, PNG, PNG Diplomat in London, simple living 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-next-in-line/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The North Sydney Bears losing $11 million in promised NSW government funding has put PNG in the box seat to be named the 18th NRL side.
The funding promised by Dom Perrottet’s ousted Liberal government in the lead up to this year’s state election has been scrapped by new Labour premier Chris Minns.
On the other hand, the federal government has financially backed PNG to join the NRL in a move made by Prime Minister Anthony Albanese to improve international relations.
PNG Prime Minister James Marape asked the Australian Government for an NRL team by 2025 to mark the 50th anniversary of his country’s independence – and Albanese is determined to deliver it.
Albanese wants a Port Moresby-based team, with games to also be played in Cairns, as a way to counter China’s growing influence in the region.
Australia’s Pacific Minister Pat Conroy in July committed $5.5 million to help PNG prepare a business case for their NRL bid and develop a pipeline of players.
Albanese has reportedly indicated privately that his government is prepared to help underwrite a team with up to $25 million a year from the foreign aid budget.
The PNG Hunters joined the Queensland Cup in 2014 and won the title 2017 – the same year the national side made the quarterfinals of the Rugby League World Cup.
PNG hosted the Australia’s PM’s XIII in Port Moresby last month and the Kumuls more than held their own against a side full of NRL stars.
They then thrashed the Cook Islands last weekend in their Pacific Championships opener as PNG’s expansion bid builds serious momentum.
Andrew Hill is the lead consultant for PNG’s bid and told foxsports.com.au that the Australian government support was a “game changer”.
“The bid itself is not being run an individual but by the government of PNG,” Hill said.
“It could (go ahead without Albanese’s support) but there’s no doubt having both the Australian and the PNG government involved is a game changer.”
On the back of the Dolphins successful entry in the NRL this year, there were reports on Thursday that the Kumuls could join the competition as soon as 2025.
But Hill emphasised, however, that whoever wins the next NRL licence, it would only be announced by 2025 and the side would enter the NRL closer to 2027.
The Australia Government in August announced it would tip in $7 million to help fund the inaugural Pacific Championship, a tournament involving men’s and women’s teams from Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, New Zealand, Samoa, Papua New Guinea and Tonga.
The bid team are focusing on an outright PNG team, but a Pasifika model is also being considered.
Samoa and Parramatta captain Junior Paulo has previously said he would play for a Pasifika NRL side.
“While we think rugby league in the Pacific is far stronger, it gives us the confidence to discuss what a Pacific team may look like.
“Obviously PNG would be leading those discussions, but clearly the genuine goal of the PNG government is to get more content in PNG and a licence based there.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/search/png/page/3/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Rising high in the morning sun ahead of Independence Boulevard is the heartbeat of the nation, the National Parliament House of Papua New Guinea.
The Special Olympics Papua New Guinea Team returned to the country with four gold medals yesterday after competing at the 2023 World Summer Games in Berlin, Germany.
PNG Angels provide children and young adults in PNG with access to life-saving neurosurgeries.
Recently I caught up with a childhood friend of mine at the University of Goroka.
Solomon Islanders have and will greatly benefit from the Solomon Islands Football Academy funded by Papua New Guinea, it’s government and people worth K20 million.
BOUGAINVILLE President Ishmael Toroama says the Late Great Grand Chief Sir Michael Thomas Somare always described Bougainville as an integral part of Papua New Guinea.
PNG table tennis team are taking the opening two days of their competition by storm.
French President Emmanuel Macron has kicked off his Pacific visit yesterday starting with New Caledonia, then Vanuatu and en-route Papua New Guinea end of this week.
Justin Olam: Papua New Guinea’s official tourism brand ambassador 
PNG Tourism promotion authority CEO Eric Mossman Uvovo yesterday officially announced PNG international and Melbourne Storm centre Justin Olam as the PNG’s tourism brand ambassador.
Benson Nomu from Harile village, West New Britain Province joined athletics at the age of 12 when his school hosted carnivals and sporting events not knowing that athletics would take him to the national level.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/christianity-in-png/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Prime Minister James Marape flew out last Sunday to Jerusalem hoping to boost foreign investment and to strengthen the Christian bond between Israel and Papua New Guinea.
With a delegation comprised of church and business leaders, PM Marape officially open the new embassy in Jerusalem, in response to local church groups that have lobbied for a firmer relationship with Israel for so long.
When PM Marape was in Israel, news broke out that a Christian prayer warrior back home, “using the name of the Lord, started performing a prayer ritual and was describing and naming people in the village who she claimed had satanic powers and were killing and causing people to get sick, have bad luck and struggle in finding education, finding jobs and doing business”.
Upon the prayer warrior’s words, a community in Bulolo, Morobe Province, went bonkers and tortured a 39-year-old mother to her death. She was suspected of possessing satanic powers and of being a witch.
It is hard to accept that such a barbaric killing should occur in Morobe, the stronghold of the Evangelical Lutheran Church, which has quickly condemned the killing.
PNG joined a handful of countries that have established embassies in Jerusalem, following the commitment by PM Marape on the National Prayer and Repentance Day on August 26.
He also told the country a law would be introduced to officially make PNG a Christian country.
The Government envisaged that a close relationship with Israel is essential for PNG’s aspirations in economy, agriculture, health and technology and a recognition of Israel’s claim to Jerusalem as its capital based on biblical and secular history.
We will have to wait to see the Palestinians, who claim Jerusalem as their territory, will react. We all should know about the feud between Israel and Palestine if we are Christians because the feud is ancient.
Australia and Britian had to withdraw their plans to set up embassies in Jerusalem, when Palestine protested, describing the move as a “blatant violation of international law”.
If by moving into Jerusalem, we anticipate divine intervention to really change the attitudes and behaviours of our people towards the escalating tortures and killings from sorcery related accusations, the gender-based violence and the tribal conflicts as well as the general lawlessness here, hopefully we see some miracles soon.
While we wait, we have to ask some critical questions as Christians. Where is the love? Where is the respect? Where is justice?
The Christian religion was introduced into PNG in the 1800s and by the 1930s, the early missionaries were all over the country, establishing churches and spreading the word of God.
Today the bible and its teachings are as old as the country and in our view, there is no need to preach about God or the Christian faith anymore. We believe in Him or we don’t, its simple as that.
How can our Churches in PNG contribute to a peaceful, united and prosperous PNG? This is the big question our churches here must ask themselves today, as we grapple with the challenges facing us.
Whatever is happening around the country may be happening because our people have lost their faith in God.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/search/png/page/2/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Angela Dorothea Merkel was a German politician, who led her country as Chancellor from November 2005 to December 2021.
The Government’s flagship transport infrastructure program – Connect PNG – was rolled out in 2020.
Businesswomen , humanitarian and women’s advocate Monica Salter is PNG’s newest Dame.
The PNG Games Executive Committee in consultation with PNG Games Council Members has resolved to reschedule the 8th PNG Games again, pending respective Provincial Administrations’ assurances that key expenses will be met to ensure participation. This decision was reached when 18 provinces failed to convince the Games Organising Committee that they would show up at […]
The 7th Melanesian Arts and Culture Festival has come to an end as the PNG contingent arrived in Port Moresby last week Friday.
This weekend, thousands from the Evangelical Lutheran Church will converge on Ialibu station in Southern Highlands for the 34th Church Synod.
A Vocal Government MP has labelled the Connect PNG Program, the signature policy initiative of the Marape-Rosso Government, “misguided’ and should be halted with funds diverted to addressing key social programs in the country.
The Australian Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese arrived in Port Moresby and addressed the PNG Parliament early this year. His agenda for that visit was regional security and he expressed clearly Australia’s concern surrounding this matter very clearly.
In the representative democracy we have in this country, Parliament remains the ultimate body that makes laws as the legislator.
As Ben Ikin took his first steps towards a rugby league field in Papua New Guinea, the Queensland Rugby League chief executive officer instantly felt the nation’s immense passion for the game.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-at-a-glance/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
In TERMS of surface area PNG’s territory encompasses 462,840 square kilometers (sqkm) with a coastline stretching 5152sqkm dotted by 600 islands.We share a common border with the largest Muslim nation of the world, Indonesia that is 820km long.
The National Population Census of 2011 put PNG’s population at 7.28 million with a fast growing rate of 3.2 per cent per year. The challenge is to match the rate at which we are increasing in numbers with the ability to provide goods and service; that is govern adequately.
The sad story about gender equality is that women are expected to outlive men. According to the United Nations average life expectancy for women in PNG is 63.2 years compared to 58.5 years for men.Generally, the population is fairly young with a median age of just under 22 and an estimated 40 per cent under 15 years of age.
Forty-three per cent of the population is Highlands-based. Twenty-five per cent in Mamose, 18 per cent in Southern provinces and 14 per cent in the New Guinea Islands.To work out your region’s population, multiply thecountry’s total by your percentage and then divide by 100.
We keep referring to rural areas as places that are outside of cities. This is incorrect.
There are urban centres such as the provincial capitals and they have their town boundaries. Rural places are the villages and hamlets that are in the countryside – the mountains, the valleys, swamps, islands, rainforests, grasslands and coastline.Around 85 per cent of our people are to be found in these rural settings and they predominantly practise subsistence agriculture.According to the National Statistical Office, Port Moresby, the nation’s capital had 364,125 people in 2011. Lae, the second city to be established after Port Moresby reputedly had 200,000 and Mt Hagen, the third city, 400,000.
These figures cannot be trusted because PNG does not have a National Data Base and movement of people between provinces is very fluid. Port Moresby has become a hiding place for murderers escaping from their enemies in the Highlands.LANGUAGE
PNG is said to have more than 800 languages; there is no exact figure, just ‘over’ 800 and no language list has ever been found. Perhaps the national Data Base will show one day. But English is the official language and two other recognized lingua franca; Pidgin becoming the dominant language all over the country. The National carrier does not recognise this arrangement and excludes the use of Motu.RELIGION
There is no State religion. The Head of State, the British Monarch is Anglican but the Anglican church of PNG is one of the smallest Christian groups at around three per cent. The Constitution of the country allows freedom of religion. In its 2013 investment Climate Statement, the United States State Department said, the government of PNG welcomed foreign investment with a liberal investment regime.GOVERNMENT
The country is demarcated into four regions with 22 provinces within which are the National Capital District (NCD) and the Autonomous Region of Bougainville (ABG). The provinces are divided into 89 districts or electorates with 325 local government wards.The regions – Mamose, New Guinea Islands, Highlands and southern have no political representation while the provinces have elected governors.The National Parliament consists of 118 MPs who serve 5-year terms elected by universal suffrage under a Limited Preferential Voting system. This group is divided into 96 members of Parliament (MPs) elected from single member constituencies and 22 elected from single member provincial divisions. These divisions are the 18 provinces of PNG plus the ABG and NCD.MPs elected as provincial division representatives become governors of their provinces unless they are appointed as Minister to the National Executive Council in which case one of the constituency MP is elected to be the governor. But most prefer to be governor.The parliament is unicameral, meaning that Bills which pass a vote in the House do not need referral to an upper chamber, but can go directly into law. As a member of the Commonwealth, the country’s Head-of-State is the British monarch, represented by the governor-general who is elected by parliament for a 6-year term and may be re-elected only once, provided he or she secures a two-thirds majority vote.CLIMATE
Temperatures and rainfall are subject to the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone, the South Pacific Convergence Zone and the West Pacific Monsoon.PNG is the 12th most disaster-prone country in the world. Located in the Pacific ring of fire, the most seismically-active region of the planet, PNG is exposed to risks including earthquakes, tsunami, tropical cyclones, volcanic eruptions and systematic flooding.BIODIVERSITY
As hot as PNG is seismically, 4.5 per cent of the planet’s known mammals are found here. There are more than 800 species of birds rivaling the number of languages we speak and almost 300,000 vascular plants that supplement our oxygen tank.Thirty-eight of the world’s 42-known species of Birds-of-Paradise favour PNG as their country of choice, so does the planet’s biggest butterfly – the Queen Alexandra bird-wing. Joining them in the exclusive stakes area the largest specie of tree frog, pigeon and orchids. Twelve of the known 14 species of tree kangaroos are found in PNG and to top the list, the planet’s only- known poisonous bird.NATURAL RESOURCE
While minerals and hydrocarbon resource dominate exports, 85 per cent of the country’s population is employed in the agriculture sector accounting for around one –third of Gross Domestic Product or GDP which is a measurement of the permanent cash income of citizens.Our primary agriculture exports are coffee, tea, cocoa, copra and palm oil. PNG was world’s seventh- largest producer and third-largest exporter of palm oil in 2008, accounting for 1.3 per cent of global exports. We were the seventeenth largest producer of coffee in 2010 accounting for 0.7 per cent of global production.
According to the National Fisheries Authority, out total annual tuna catches averaged around 482,000 tonnes between 2006 and 2011, representing some eleven per cent of global catch.ISLAND HISTORY
While archaeological evidence of human habitation dates back 60,000 years, the first written records of life in the eastern half of Papua go back to the first European contact in 1526. The island of New Guinea is the second biggest in the world after Greenland.INVESTMENT
After 43 years of nationhood, PNG still hold s a special significance for Australians. Results from the Lowy institute’s 2015 Poll – Australia and the World – showed that Aussies feel a strong sense of obligation to PNG. Eighty-two per cent of Aussies agreed that stability in PNG was important to Australia’s national interest and 77 per cent said Australia had a moral obligation to help PNG.Australia is PNG’;s largest trading partner and largest source of foreign investment. PNG was forecast to be the world’s fastest growing economy in 2015 but only a minority (37 per cent) agreed that PNG had strong economic prospects.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Ling-Stuckey Benched The predicted Cabinet reshuffle occurred yesterday with Treasurer Ian Ling-Stuckey becoming the bombshell victim.
Govt increase funding by K93.6 million The government tuition fees funding for this year has increased by K93.6 million, according to the Education Secretary Dr Uke Kombra.
Daki out, Dr Joseph in as Defence minister Social Democratic Party members were all smiles yesterday as Deputy Leader for SDP and Nipa-Kutubu MP Dr Billy Joseph was named as the new PNG Defence Force Minister.
Youths with no school and job, I will find you: Marape Youths between the ages of 15 and 30, who have dropped out of school or with no jobs, I want your names, says Prime Minister James Marape.
Women’s group Donate fresh garden foods to CPL THE Enga Enda Anda women’s group in Enga province is the first from outside of Port Moresby to come forward and donate fresh garden foods to CPL group of companies…
Asia and the Pacific swap places According to the World Health Organization, Universal Health Coverage (UHC) requires that all people receive the promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative health services they need and can afford.
Pirate attacks on rise in Morobe waters Pirate attacks in the coastal waters of Morobe and Popondetta are becoming a concern. In the past five years, there have been incidences of pirates taking control of boats ferrying…
Application for school fee subsidy program open Applications are open for the Eastern Highlands governor’s tuition fee subsidy assistant program.
Dragons miss out again St George Illawarra’s recruitment drive has hit another snag after the Canberra Raiders rejected a release request from hooker Zac Woolford to immediately move to the Dragons.
US in new strikes against Houthi  The United States military said on Wednesday its forces conducted strikes on 14 Houthi missiles that were loaded to be fired from Yemen, in the fourth day of US…
Grabbing US$300 billion of Russian assets is no solution, West cautions Western officials said in Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday that they were open to the idea of confiscating U$300 billion (K1.1 trillion) of Russian assets to help Ukraine, but cautioned that…
US Treasury official discusses cholera outbreak, debt with Zambia The United States Treasury Department’s top international official spoke with Zambia’s finance minister on Wednesday and discussed Zambia’s ongoing debt restructuring and its response to a recent cholera outbreak, the…
Guatemalan ex-president barred from entering US Former Guatemalan President Alejandro Giammattei has been barred from entering the US over allegations of “his  involvement in significant corruption,” the State Department said on Wednesday.
Raki a star in the making The inaugural Kewabi Epari, Ialibu-Pangia Unity Cup has certainly unearted many hidden talents.
Wabo puts best foot forward If there is one push factor for PNG Hunters backline utility Sanny Wabo to retain a spot in the team, it would be his eight-month-old daughter, Ariel Sanny.
Doc clears Morea Morea Junior Good news coming out from the South Pacific Brewery sponsored PNG Hunters side is the return of injured fullback Morea Morea Jr.
Athletics PNG 2024 calendar Athletics PNG has released its 2024 Calendar of events with its main overseas event for the year being the Oceania Championships in Suva , Fiji, from June 4 to 8.
One dead in Kainantu ONE person has died and several homes burned as fighting erupted between the Isontenu & Puanano villages and the enemy tribe from Yauna, 8 & 9mile in Kainantu district, Eastern…
Use restraint and common sense CENTRAL police commander, Chief Inspector Laimo Aisi has called on police officers within his command to be “positive and restore the intergrity of the Constabulary”.
State of Emergency does not include curfew ACTING Police Commissioner Donald Yamasombi says there is no curfew in the recently announced 14 day State of Emergency in Port Moresby.
Security company warns hooligans The Night Owl Security Service has warned the hooligans to be wary of their impulsive looting on innocent targets.
Convention to help students grow in faith in Kundiawa THE Catholic Diocese of Kundiawa, for the first time, hosted the tertiary students’ formation convention aimed at helping students progress in the Catholic faith.
Kumul partners with Site Group to expand skills training Kumul Petroleum Holdings Limited through its training entity, the Kumul Petroleum Academy (KPA) is expanding its training capacity by building a new training facility next door to its fabrication facility.
Sepik Basin LOs seek answers on Nopan project Sepik Basin landowners are appealing to the government to clarify the progress of a petroleum exploration project in the region.
400,000 people to be impacted, says CPL CEO Approximately 400,000 people in the community that depend on Stop and Shop shops for everyday essentials are now impacted with the looting and damage of these shops in the National…
PNG joins global trade coalition Minister for International Trade and Investment, Richard Maru, while participating at the 54th annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland, has announced Papua New Guinea’s membership to…
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/18-provinces-confirmed-for-png-games/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The 8th PNG Games set to be hosted in Port Moresby has lured 18 provincial teams confirming their participation.PNG Sports Foundation CEO Albert Veratau said to date 18 provinces have confirmed participation by means of accreditation via the online registration portal.“Eighteen provinces are quite a lot and the four that are yet to register are; Enga, East Sepik, Madang and East New Britain,” said Veratau.
Veratau urged all provinces to be part of the Games as it is an integral part of PNG, saying; “that is why they are obliged to join in on the celebrations and exhibit provincial culture and pride enhancing National Unity and thus the theme of the 8th PNG Games is ‘Unity and Pride.”He said they are working closely with the PNG Olympic Committee, 11 Sporting Federations and NCDC to run the 8th PNG Games.“The eleven sports federation have been very positive and are excited to be a part of games organising committee,” he said.He said currently there is a total of 4,720 games participants that have already been accredited, but the tally is expected to increase to 6,000 when the remaining four provinces complete their registration later this month.“The new total will be close to the Honiara Pacific Games numbers,” said Veratau.He said now it all falls on the shoulders of the GOC as they have a daunting task to manage the 300 sports and general volunteers, 350 technical officials and 400 security personnel that brings the total up to 1,050 to provide assistance during the course of the Games.“I salute the 22 provincial governments and the 96 district development authorities for recognising the value sports adds to nation building by supporting the youths to proudly wear their respective provincial colours to this sporting event,” said Veratau.He also extended invitation to all government agencies and, NGO’s, business organisations and development partners to come forward and set up stalls at all the sporting venues to showcase their products and deliver awareness to those participating in the Games.“About 200,000 people are expected to visit the game venues over the 10 days kicking off with the opening ceremony on 10th January 2024.”
Tagged: 8th PNG Games, Albert Veratau, PNG Sports Foundation 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-games-rescheduled/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The PNG Games Executive Committee in consultation with PNG Games Council Members has resolved to reschedule the 8th PNG Games again, pending respective Provincial Administrations’ assurances that key expenses will be met to ensure participation.
This decision was reached when 18 provinces failed to convince the Games Organising Committee that they would show up at the Games earmarked for delivery from 10th-20th January 2024.
As of 29th December 2023; feedback from Provincial teams revealed that only Team Manus and Team Milne Bay have secured plane tickets to fly into Port Moresby, Team Gulf secured buses to travel by road to the host City to join Team Central and Team NCD.
Four provinces out of the 22 provinces did not meet the minimum requirement to participate.
With less than two weeks before the Opening Ceremony, most provinces were still fundraising to secure sufficient funds to fly their teams to Port Moresby.
The Games Organising Committee had no choice but to request the Council Executive Committee give the provincial teams more time to source sufficient funds to budget for travel, accommodation, meals, uniforms, and other costs.
In endorsing the decision; Albert Veratau, the Chairman of the PNG Games Council acknowledged the National Sporting Bodies, National Capital District Commission, and National Cultural Commission for supporting PNG Sports Foundation in delivering the Games.
He also thanked the hardworking provincial team management, coaches, and fundraising committees for exhibiting exceptional commitment and resilience to put provincial teams together during the past six months.
There is now a call out by the Council for all provincial governments to support their provincial teams.
The PNG Games has impacted the lives of thousands of citizens in all provinces spread across two generations.
Since it’s a recognized national event the national government is obliged to appropriate separate funding for the delivery of the Games including travel subsidy for provincial teams as was done for the 5th PNG Games in 2012, in Kokopo East New Britain Province.
In the New Year, the Council will host a PNG Games Seminar in Port with the objective being to review the Games including the charter. 
This will be the first time in 20 years for the Games to be evaluated since its inception in 2003.
Invitations will be sent out to prominent sports investors including Sir Peter Ipatas and Tony Green PNGOC senior vice president to speak at the seminar followed by general discussions and resolutions for the way forward.
Tagged: PNG Games, PNG Games Executive Committee, PNG Sports Federation 
‘All secondary teachers must have a provisional registration certificate’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-is-the-core-of-melanesia/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The 7th Melanesian Arts and Culture Festival has come to an end as the PNG contingent arrived in Port Moresby last week Friday.
Minister for Arts, Tourism and Culture Isi Henry Leonard highlighted that as the big brother among the Melanesian countries, PNG brought life to the festival in every sense.
“Prior to our arrival, the festival felt incomplete by most of the participating countries. When PNG arrived and took the stage, the event was brought to life as the big brother country stormed in with multiple exquisite traditional performance, displaying the strength and spirit of Melanesian brotherhood,” he said.
“In our absence, their numbers were small and the diversity was limited. But as soon as we arrived, you could see how our presence lifted the spirits of our brothers and sisters from the other side and we all showcased our culture brilliantly to the rest of the World who were present at the event.”
“PNG is the core of Melanesia that holds our people together as one. As the big brother we must do our best and take lead wherever we can, to preserve our people, culture and our Melanesian way of life.”
The contingent of performers who represented PNG in Vanuatu included traditional groups from Bougainville, West New Britain, Hela, East New Britain and stage performers from the UPNG Arts faculty.
PNG had the biggest contingent apart from the other Melanesian countries who were present including Fiji, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands.
The PNG contingent”, however, missed the opening ceremony and arrived four days late due to delays in the allocation of funds.
Mr Leonard said the other Melanesian countries have also expressed their gratitude to PNG.
“I would like to commend the National Cultural Commission and the government who were supportive to make this all possible, including SoE Minister William Duma and Air Niugini.“I would also like to thank our participants who represented their country with pride,” he said.
“Culture is a significant part of our country and people, therefore we must all do our best to preserve, promote and practice it wherever we can.
“Our culture defines us as Papua New Guineans and Melanesians, which gives us our unique identity from the rest of the world.”
He further added that engagement in the cultural space is good for sectors such as tourism and investment, which is beneficial for the economy of the four Melanesian states.
“Our culture is also under threat from other cultures that are being introduced. We must do more of these cultural activities not only to protect them, but attract foreigners as well.
Melanesians are unique from the rest of the world and this is the stage where we showcase ourselves,” he said.
Tagged: Melanesian Arts and Culture Festival, Melanesian countries, Minister for Arts, National Cultural Commission, Papua New Guineans, Tourism and Culture Isi Henry Leonard, UPNG Arts faculty 
‘All secondary teachers must have a provisional registration certificate’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/a-year-of-collaboration-and-achievements-for-png/

A year of collaboration and achievements for PNG - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
As the year 2023 comes to an end, and a new year dawning, thousands of parents and their children will be scratching, shoving and pushing to put their children to a school – especially those who’s child missed out on tertiary placings.
The country will also look forward to some “political games” come February as some “mischievous” turns comes to a fore – the Vote of No Confidence!
But this is not to say the least! – Papua New Guinea experienced a transformative year in 2023, marked by significant bilateral collaborations and remarkable achievements in various sectors.
The year began with Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese addressing the National Parliament, setting the tone for a productive and eventful year.
The highlight of the year came in December when PNG and Australia signed a historic K455 million security agreement, solidifying their commitment to regional stability.
Throughout the year, PNG engaged in high-level meetings and collaborations with several world leaders, including United States President Joe Biden, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Indonesian President Joko Widodo, French President Emmanuel Macron, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, South Korean President Yoon Suk Yeol, and Chinese President Xi Jinping. 
These meetings aimed to strengthen diplomatic ties, foster economic partnerships, and explore areas of mutual cooperation.
One of the most significant collaborations was with Australia, resulting in the signing of a Bi-lateral Security Agreement worth K455 million.
This agreement signifies the commitment of both countries to enhance security measures and protect their shared interests.
The People’s Republic of China also played a vital role in PNG’s development. Direct flights between Guangzhou and Port Moresby were launched by Southern China Airlines, promoting tourism and facilitating trade between the two nations.
The Chinese government provided a K50 million grant to build business and technical facilities in selected schools in PNG.
Additionally, the Metallurgical Corporation of China began downstream processing in PNG through the Ramu Nickel project.
PNG’s membership in the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, a significant global financial institution, further strengthened its position in the international arena.
The collaboration with the United States resulted in the signing of two defence agreements, namely the Defence Cooperation Agreement and the Shipriders Agreement.
These agreements bolstered PNG’s external border security and facilitated closer co-operation between the two countries.
The opening of the US Aid office in Port Moresby also signified increased bilateral engagement.
In an effort to promote agricultural expertise, PNG opened an embassy in Jerusalem, Israel and entered into an agreement for training Papua New Guineans in specialist agriculture.
Likewise, PNG and Indonesia established a direct air service between Bali and Port Moresby and secured 2000 student scholarships for PNG students to study in Indonesia.
France demonstrated its support for PNG’s forest management efforts by providing a K344 million ‘country package’.
France recognised PNG as a ‘Forest Nation’, acknowledging its valuable contribution to global forest conservation.
PNG received further backing from France at European Union, G7, and G20 forums, positioning itself as a leading advocate for sustainable forestry.
The European Union contributed K210 million for the Forestry, Climate Change, and Biodiversity Program, co-ordinated by French President Emmanuel Macron. 
This program aims to address pressing environmental issues and promote sustainable development in PNG.
Beyond international collaborations, PNG also witnessed significant domestic achievements. 
The year began with the nation mourning the loss of one of its first prime ministers, Sir Rabbie Namaliu.
However, the country quickly rebounded by launching its Fourth Medium-Term Development Plan, guiding its vision for the next four years.
PNG actively participated in international summits, attending the Melanesian Spearhead Group Summit in Vanuatu, opening an embassy in Jerusalem, and hosting the first PNG-Asia Mining & Petroleum Conference in Hong Kong, targeting Asian investors.
It maintained a strong presence at key global forums, including the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Leaders’ summit in San Francisco and the Pacific Islands Forum Summit in the Cook Islands.
Other notable achievements included the release of the highest National Budget to date, totaling K27.377 billion for 2024.
The Barrick Gold Corporation re-opened the Porgera mine but production to begin first quarter of next year, a pioneering step in reclaiming resource ownership.
With a 51% stake in the mine, Papua New Guinean stakeholders celebrated unprecedented benefits sharing in natural resource development.
Another milestone was the establishment and commissioning of the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC).
This landmark anti-corruption agency is the culmination of decades-long efforts and exemplifies PNG’s commitment to combating corruption and ensuring good governance.
The success of the Internal Revenue Commission (IRC) and Customs further contributed to PNG’s achievements, as both agencies consistently exceeded revenue collection targets.
This financial stability has played a crucial role in funding national development initiatives and shaping the 2024 National Budget.
As 2023 draws to a close, Papua New Guinea reflects on a year filled with remarkable collaborations and achievements.
These milestones set a strong foundation for continued growth, development, and international recognition for the nation.
Let us have hope for 2024 with more achievements to come! Happy New Year 2024!
Tagged: Anthony Albanese, Benjamin Netanyahu, Emmanuel Macron, Joe Biden, Joko Widodo, Narendra Modi, National Parliament, Xi Jinping, Yoon Suk Yeol 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/how-government-subsidies-could-literally-turn-out-the-lights-on-png/

How Government Subsidies Could Literally Turn Out the Lights on PNG - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
			How Government Subsidies Could Literally Turn Out the Lights on PNG		
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
How embarrassing! Like Vision City shopping mall running out of stuff to sell. 
Or the Yacht Club running out of boats, and seawater. Yet, electricity has almost found a special place in our survival and existence- along with water, air and freedom.
An air or water outage has pretty severe consequences. As we see in Gaza now though – electricity provides the air (and medical ventilation), water, a thousand other things we need to live.
Many newspapers around the country and region have reported the political side of PNG’s own recent outages.
Landowner groups, retail firms and host of others have already started demanding compensation.
Such examples show that some of the economic issues surrounding power outages should grap our interest far more than the mere politics of power.
Imagine living without your mobile phone. Even now, you probably go to a nearby friend or untended-to wall socket for a recharge. Life without WhatsApp? YouTube? You actually have no idea.
Daily life in PNG will – within 10 years – resemble the ‘handphone’ centric lives of our brothers and sisters in Indonesia, Singapore and even Hong Kong. You can’t even see a menu in many of the restaurants in my neighbourhood without a mobile phone. No QR code? No service. 
Worse for the average Papua New Guinean, many government services will be offered online or not-at-all. Taxes. 
Your daily economic life will get worse because of all the extra free government money PNG’s electricity sector gets. As discussed in my overview of PNG’s 2024 Budget, PNG Power represents one of the biggest state-owned entities (and certainly public services) targeted for subsidization. Who cares?
Us economists call it the ‘damage squared rule.’ Our economist forefathers worked out the problems these subsidies and the ‘squared’ damages they cause. 
These economists have shown that K500 in subsidizes don’t just cause K500 in wasted wages, fun or profit. Subsidies cost K250,000! Or (500)2 for you math lovers. 
The reason is that these subsidizes filter out into the economy. They dampen, restrict and depress all kinds of spending. 
Lots of workers dash their plans to spend a K500 night out. Or hire extra part-time gig help at the shop. Savers, consumers, charities – everyone pulls back on the reins a little. 
The pot shirks for everyone by far more than it does for anyone.This result is one of the e=mc2 of public economics.
Come on. Some power outages have not turned PNG into the deep, dark Amazon. A bit of government money to a state owned/supported power company can hardly cause the end of the world.
But let’s look at all the cases were governments kept subsidizing electricity. The more they did it, the more they had to do it. 
Until the economic crisis hit. Every year, the headlines always read the same. The IMF and World Bank demand the end of electricity subsidies – and government coalitions fall. Outages mean demand for electricity exceeds supply. Duh!
When demand for electricity exceeds supply, you see it as outages and feel it as higher power bills. Households end up subsidized. 
National debt rises. And governments fall. Just look how governments like Malaysia’s have pulled back on promises to provide electricity. 
In most countries I’ve visited, power outages represent a first flicker of a larger power failure.
This seems like a stupid question. Not so stupid. PNG represents one of the few red countries on the world map of power-cut also-rans.
The lack of an effectively regulated and run private sector electricity market represents one of the many reasons for the PNG’s soaring corruption.
If we as Papua New Guineans can’t muster the courage to closely monitor crooked procurement and spending, we definitely deserve one able to keep the lights on. Lots of countries couldn’t – even with all the petrol and LNG they could want.
The power cuts in Lebanon (caused exactly as described above) represent one such example. We get black outs – but look at all the ‘free’ services we get. 
Remember emc2? The PNG’s subsidized power costs the budget a fortune. And jeopardizes the quality of life here badly. 
So badly that thousands of experts have started asking if parliaments world-wide like ours need to think about a “universal right to electricity.”
As we saw in the introduction, we need it almost as badly as air and water. Even in rich places like America, the uneven distribution of steady, reliable electricity tended to kill certain poor, disadvantaged communities far more than others.
Pass a budget amendment act. Reduce electricity subsidizes. I can tell you – just by looking at the lights shining below as I fly into PNG at night – where the biggest graft is taking place. Tonight. Right now. Find every mid-level government official with a fancy watch and house. 
Make them buy their own electricity. I can tell you which neighbourhoods need the subsidies and which ones don’t – just by driving through. The taxes they fail to pay harms you and your family by far faster than the speed of light. They make all your harms ‘squared’.
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/explore-png-with-trans-niugini-tours/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
FOR this Christmas holiday, New Year, or next year for your birthday, celebrate with a booked tour using Trans Niugini Tours to see the many sides of Papua New Guinea.
Trans Niugini Tours is what is known to the travel trade as an inbound tour operator and they offer all tourism services that are available in PNG to their overseas clients. 
It is a private PNG company that comes under the name Trans Niugini Tours Limited and it started operating in 1975.
The name has been in use now for almost 50 years as when they still first came up with the name, the country was just forming and it seemed appropriate at the time. Initially, they started out with tourist buses and operating them between the main highland towns.
The main headquarters is in Mount Hagen and it has a small operational office in Port Moresby. Their main mission is to show the world the culture and natural beauty of PNG in comfort.
If someone were to describe their company, they would say that they are a destination management company that can make bookings for all tourist services in Papua New Guinea, put them together and operate a tour in PNG for clients.
They have two main markets, a domestic PNG market and an international market. For the international market, they deal directly with international tour operators in other countries and they in turn have their own client base.
For the domestic market, they normally deal directly with the individual person, a family or a company. The domestic market would pay with cash, internet bank transfer or by credit card.
They tailor tours for people not only for their budget but also for what they would like to see or experience in Papua New Guinea. 
As for how expensive it is, it is very much dependent on what people want to see and do as well as how long they would like to stay. If you wish to book a tour, just know that their peak season is from July to October.
The companys main vision and mission is to show the world the culture and natural beauty of PNG in comfort. 
They are unique in that they own and operate their own tourist plant which includes, lodges, buses, boats and airplanes. 
The top destinations that people usually go for when they book with Trans Niugini Tours would be the companys own lodges in Papua New Guinea such as Karawari Lodge, Ambua Lodge, Lake Murray Lodge ,the Sepik Spirit and Bensbach wildlife Lodge.
They are environmentally friendly as two of their lodges have their energy supplied by mini hydroelectric power (water turbines) while two others (Bensbach and Lake Murray) are operated by 100% solar power.
Most of their international clients are interested in Cultural, Birding or Nature tours. Their domestic clients are interested in forest walks and relaxing in the cool highland temperatures or having a birthday party, meeting or conference. 
They also have fishermen who fish at Bensbach or Lake Murray.
If you want to book your tour today then you can contact them by telephone, email or social media or type in the words ‘Trans Niugini Tours’ on Google and visit their website. 
If you wish to pay for your tour, the company accepts cash, online bank transfers and credit cards.
Over the years they have had the following people stay with them; Sir Mick Jagger, Sean Lenon (John Lennon’s son-of Beatle fame), Buz Aldrin (Walked on the moon with Neil Armstrong), and David Attenborough. 
All these famous people have booked tours using Trans Niugini Tours and have visited the land of a thousand tribes. 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/png-projects-are-part-of-decarbonisation-plans/

PNG projects are part of decarbonisation plans - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
Two projects were highlighted in Sydney, Australia for being investment ready projects in PNG.As part of the decarbonisation program in PNG Tasman Environmental Markets (TEM) Chief Customer Officer Adrian Enright highlighted the two programs making headway in the country.“The April Salumei REDD is 600, 000 hectares of a project.”According to information gathered, the April Salumei REDD Project is the pilot project for Papua New Guinea.Its aim is to protect the forest and biodiversity of the area (603,579ha) whilst providing an important source of income for the traditional owners.The traditional owners have formed the April Salumei Working Group to assist with the management of the project.About 60 per cent of all revenue goes directly to the landowners who actively determine the allocation of funds to activities such health care, education facilities, infrastructure and the development sustainable agricultural activities for the local people whilst preserving the rich cultural traditions and culture.Mr Enright said that the biodiversity in PNG is bigger with the April Salumei project continuing to have significant community flow.He spoke of another project known as Clean Cook Stoves Project which is largely implemented currently in Southern Highlands.By way of decarbonisation he highlighted that the, “technology is cleaner with the old way of cooking over fire causing the burning of fuel which is about 90 per cent still associated of timber use.”“The Cook Stoves Project is reducing emissions by felling the wood and collecting less. Cook Stoves is also seeing respiratory benefits reduced and it is significant,” Mr Enright said.“Decarbonisation journey is multi-facitated and it is strongly recommended for organisations look beyond carbons.”
Tagged: Adrian Enright, Australia, PNG Tasman Environmental Markets, Sydney 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/china-defends-pngs-role/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The Chinese Foreign Affairs ministry was this week forced to defend PNG’s role in its Belt and Road Initiative.This is two months after inviting Prime Minister James Marape to be part of the grand forum to mark the initiative’s 10th anniversary in Beijing.“China stands ready to continue working with Papua New Guinea to synergize the development strategies, expand practical cooperation in various fields under the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative on the basis of mutual respect and equal-footed consultation, and pursue common development,” Ministry spokesperson Mao Ning said on Monday.
Mao said this in Beijing during her daily press conference, where she was asked if Mr Marape’s comments about being careful with foreign loans, especially BRI funding, was a cause for concern for China.“Papua New Guinea is the first Pacific Island country to sign an MOU on Belt and Road cooperation and Belt and Road cooperation plans with China.“It has played a leading role and set an example in the Belt and Road cooperation between China and Pacific Island countries.” Before Mr Marape’s trip to Beijing at the invitation of the Chinese government, PNG Treasurer Ian-Ling Stuckey, who was part of the delegation, had said that part of the discussions with China would involve negotiations for cheap, affordable loans from the Asian giant.But after the trip, not much was revealed from the Treasurer or Prime Minister if there was any loan secured from China.But Mr Marape did announce PNG’s ascension into full membership with the Asian Infrastructure Development Bank (AIIB), the world’s second largest multi-lateral development bank.Papua New Guinea’s membership with the AIIB allows it a wider set of financing options for its development goals.Mr Marape said this when making the announcement upon his return from Beijing.Mr Marape also announced the opening of trade and investment opportunities with Chinese companies, targeting PNG’s natural resources and Chinese technology.While in Sydney this week for bilateral engagements and a business forum, Mr Marape again told journalists that he values China’s relationship, which is based on trade and development and not security or politics.
Tagged: Belt and Road Initiative, China, Ian-Ling Stuckey, James Marape, Mao Ning 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

