https://www.postcourier.com.pg/new-category/png-top-stories/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
The government is already looking at reviewing legislations to tighten up labour laws in the country and one of them is the minimum wage.
Ling-Stuckey says message from businesses was received ‘loud and clear’ 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/the-png-australia-connection/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
PNG Prime Minister James Marape will make history when he addresses the Federal Parliament at the invitation of Prime Minister Anthony Albanese. Australians believe in tradition which they keep strenuously. History is also something we should all believe in to understand the future. In looking forward to the upcoming event, here’s some background stuff.The Independent State of Papua New Guinea is a Pacific Melanesian nation of eight million people. Other Melanesian States are the former British Solomon Isles, Vanuatu, formerly French New Hebrides, New Caledonia and Fiji.In the Pacific are also Micronesian and Polynesian nations. In terms of world map, Papua New Guinea lies at the tip of Australia’s Far North Cape York Peninsula facing the Equator. Papua New Guinea or PNG is Australia’s nearest neighbour, closer than the Muslim State of Indonesia with whom PNG shares a common land border.At the extreme western end of the island of New Guinea, it is only a 10-minute boat ride to the Australian islands of Boigu and Saibai in the Torres Strait. Due to their closeness to the PNG mainland; there are traditional border crossings which is tolerated by Australia, just as happens on the land border at Vanimo on the PNG side and the Indonesian province of Irian Jaya.Irian Jaya was annexed by the Dutch but on departure at the first half of the 20th Century, handed over the indigenous Melanesians to Indonesia. The New Guinea part of the island annexed by the Germans was ‘given up’ basically, just before full-scale hostilities broke out to start WWII in PNG.Australia then assumed control over New Guinea as part of its jurisdiction over the mandated Trust Territory of Papua. After WWII, the protectorate became the Territory of Papua-New Guinea. The mandate to Australia was arranged by Britain at the United Nations because Britain said it was too far away to keep an eye on Papua.Papua was initially a British Protectorate and when mandated to Australia became its territory. The United Nations (UN) came into being as a result of loss of life and damage to economies experienced during WWII, as well as the hangover of WWI. Leaders of nations desiring peace came together to broker peace and the UN was born.It was at this time that decolonisation started and PNG happened to be at the right place at the right time. What triggered the avalanche was the change in political boundaries in the aftermath of the two great wars.
DECOLONISATIONThe assumption of responsibility over New Guinea invariably helped Australia because it demonstrated Australia’s resolve, proved its tenacity and this led to federation when ‘big brother’ Britain saw that Australia was indeed capable. Australia, as a fledgling nation itself had meager resources to be able to look after a dependency. But the belief was that ‘New Guinea’ was a territory of Australia and this paved the way for the recognition Australia needed to become the influence it got to be.Responsibility over New Guinea invariably helped AustraliaThe effects of the two World Wars affected Australia badly and as decolonisation swept the globe, Australia also warmed to the concept of peace and saw decolonisation as a necessary step in that direction. There was something else that invariably came into play as a political justification for the hand moving toward decolonisation.In the Second World War, Australia, like most people of the European race tend to do, went to meet the enemy half way – not to allow the enemy to set foot on home soil as that would amount to an invasion. Australia, to the Japanese who proved their skill as jungle fighters in the China and Korean wars, was a relatively easy topography. To allow the Japanese to set foot in Australia would not only spell disaster but, also, whatever the outcome waited at the end, national pride and sovereignty were at stake. By taking the fight to the enemy resolved these issues and New Guinea being Australia’s property was the place to engage the enemy.
DEFENCE OF AUSTRALIAAustralia fought in New Guinea to defend itself first and second, its territory. Since New Guinea is at the corridor to Australia, it became a strategic defence point for Australian security. It still is. When Douglas MacArthur was General Officer Commanding the South – West Pacific Theatre of War, this was how the defence of Australia was largely seen also; to block the advance of the Japanese in New Guinea.What actually won the day for the Allied forces was their battle strategy. Australia would take care of the air assault and the infantry and the US; the navy. The naval blockade prevented Japanese reinforcements and supplies from getting through as well as stifled any chances of retreat and regrouping. The hastily-trained Australians who flew US -supplied airplanes paid a certain price. But apart from the mop-up operations, Australia will forever relish in its war effort, notably the Battles of Kokoda, Gona and Buna-Sananada, all in the Northern Province of PNG. There were other engagements but none are more closer to the heart of Australians than these three battles.Kokoda was not only a hell of a place to fight because of its unforgiving terrain but it was also the last line of defence before Port Moresby, after which, the Japanese, if they advanced that far, would have had Australia within their sight. This was where the Fuzzy-Wuzzy Angel legend was born, and is today, the proudly- shared heritage of PNG and Australia.
SHARED INDEPENDENCEPNG on its part lacks the ability to adequately protect its borders even though new legislation has come into place. It will need Australian assistance in that regard and it is in the mutual interest of both countries to remain good and effective neighbours, the basis of which is the common heritage they share.PNG is politically independent. Socially, well; once a home-grown economic model is devised and put in place, it may lead to a clearer definition of its national character, beliefs and value systems. Economically, advancement in this sector is contingent on the social institutions being developed because they are already a part of the scenario whether PNG is industrialised or not.The country’s economy is still under customary traditions and beliefs but the fact that PNG is already a player on the world stage with borders crashing and the world becoming one global village, there is need to look at the social institutions- viz a viz – The family, economy, government and law, education and religion. All five are interconnected and herein lies the chance of developing national character and establishing its belief and value systems.PNG’s national economy, however, cannot be isolated from the world. One of the biggest challenges facing PNG is the human capacity and education, especially tertiary education, needed to empower citizens to engage in building the nation’s social structure. The PNG government is very much aware of this as a way of lifting the quality of life of its people and is hinting on people capacity-building as the basis of its economy rather than a service-driven economy.
In the colonial era the question – in whose interest was the PNG economy being built – was asked; the Papua New Guineans or the people who risked their money there? Australians like Gough Whitlam, Kim Beazley, Sir Paul Hasluck and C E Barnes were bold men, well-meaning and adventurous in their diplomacy toward the question of PNG independence.
That question of long ago still lingers. But the reality is that the policy of a Minister is like the economist’s view – always juggling between ideas to come to an agreement while the influencing factors are relentlessly active in their own way. The layman’s view is that the market economy has a lot to say about that. But again, it depends on political correctness and the prevailing circumstances. All anyone on both side of the Torres Strait can do is to take a bow in humble gratitude.
HOME RULEHome rule for PNG began as an idea. The idea initially came from the Federal Opposition. The Federal Opposition Leader in 1970 was Gough Whitlam and championing the cause of self determination for PNG saw him become prime minister two years later when Labor came into power.Whitlam arrived in the Territory and commenced his two-week tour on New Year’s Day, 1970. In Port Moresby he had consultations with leading territory figures, visited the university and later had a long briefing with senior army men including the commander of the Papua-New Guinea Command, Brigadier-General Eldridge. Later he had talks with several Port Moresby businessmen and senior Banking officials.The Australian said in an editorial: “Mr Whitlam’s target dates for home rule and Independence in New Guinea have crystalised steadily between the Government and Opposition. The Labor policy highlights two facts of life which the government refuses to face. First, the decision on when New Guinea is to become independent is not one for New Guinea alone. The time may well come when Australian opinion is not prepared to pay the political price of gradualism.And second, that the time left for the transfer of power is, in any event, extremely short. Discussion of New Guinea, such as it is, is the politician’s tendencies to conduct it in terms of sublime altruism. Australia’s national interests are just as much involved in the Independence issue as New Guinea’s. Both the Government and Opposition tacitly recognise the fact even if they define the interests differently.A definite date for home rule is vital and there seems nothing wrong with Mr Whitlam’s suggestion of 1972. Full Independence will inevitably follow soon afterwards. Perhaps after two years’ experience, could indicate how soon. But what is so clearly needed before either of these steps is removal of the dead-hand remote control system in Canberra which deprives even the present administration of independence, authority and proper exemplary value. Until the Administration has visible power that can be handed over to the native peoples, Independence will remain a half-myth in New Guinea”.Kim Beazley, the Labor Member for Freemantle accompanied Whitlam on the Opposition Leader’s tour of the Territory. From his report which he gave to the Post Courier, the campaign for Independence in New Guinea was focused on what he called the gunboat diplomacy of the key players ‘at row boat speed’ and directed at the Government, it turned the tide in Whitlam’s favour. Here is an excerpt from that report by Mr Beazley.“Increasingly, Papua-New Guinea is being run for the foreign investor. And the certain signal of the restoration of this imperial technique is the restoration of the imperial technique – the punitive expedition.” Beazley pointed out that in 1969 a punitive expedition using batons and tear gas sought to force the Rorovanas to sell their land to CRA at a price satisfactory not to themselves but to the Administration. After the visit to Canberra of Bougainville leaders Paul Lapun, MHA (Member of House of Assembly) and Raphael Bele, to tackle the conscience of the Government, Prime Minister Gorton ordered the Administration and its punitive expedition out of the affair. The natives then negotiated for themselves a deal 20 times better than did the Administration, which alleged itself to be protecting their interest.“Another punitive expedition of 1000 police went to deal with Mataungan Association members among the Tolai of New Britain. Again, Mr Gorton reversed the policy of the Administration. The 11,000 Tolai addressed by Mr Whitlam were a manifestation of growing land pressure in the Gazelle. The Minister for Territories, Mr C E Barnes has been subject to severe press criticism. When he is led by his heart and conscience, he is a winner in policy and wins the heart of native leaders”. Beazley said he had seen Mr Barnes do it. “Led by the advice of the hard-eyed economic developer, however, his policy somehow always ended in violent clashes.The Hasluck policy of equal pay for equal qualification had been discarded. It was in fact an Australian promise repudiated. Defending his policy in the House of Representatives on September 30, 1959, Mr Hasluck said: ‘Anyone – if there is anyone – who still thinks of New Guinea people as a mass of cheap labour to work for his sole advantage, and without ambition or claims of their own, not only is living in a fool’s paradise, but is basically building a fool’s hell.”“In conflicts with the most advanced sections of the people we have twice come to violent clash – the fool’s hell. So far Mr Gorton has intervened to avert the worst twice. This caprice is symptomatic of the loss of policy coherence since Sir Paul left the Ministry.” (Hasluck became the Governor-General).Sir Paul, advising the House of Representatives said: “The Territory of Papua-New Guinea is developing economically and will in future develop faster. But the level of local saving in Papua-New Guinea is low and finance for the major development projects comes predominantly from outside the Territory. Because of this, the Administration has in the past acquired – for future disposal to the people of the Territory – substantial equity holdings in certain enterprises, notably the Bougainville copper project and the New Britain palm oil project.“My government now proposes to ask the Territory House for legislation to establish a statutory corporation to acquire equity in major investment projects in the Territory. This new institution will have a close link with the Papua – New Guinea Development Bank. My Government will this month introduce a new scheme to practical, down to earth training of Papuans and New Guineans in Australia, in areas of training not available in the Territory”.In outlining the Government’s program Sir Paul said that the Government did not believe that an arbitrary date for Independence should be set by it. Even against the wishes of the people it will not do so, he said. “But my Government does believe in constant advancement towards self-government”, Sir Paul said.
INDEPENDENCE IN CONTINUATIONWe’ve seen so far that independence for PNG is in continuation. There is no question about its sovereignty and the business of governing the people and managing the nation which are continuing with remarkable success in some areas. But until a safe mark is reached where PNG will completely stand on its own, Australia is very much a part of the political, economic and social landscape of its neighbour. The colonial past and the obligations there make this inevitable and if Australia were to look in disdain to PNG’s struggles, its reputation would suffer. It is not ‘interference,’ rather, it is national conscience. Independence for PNG means as much to Australia as does to PNG so ours is a shared independence.
It is safe that way as this condition acts as a catalyst for strong bilateral relations. It’s hard to imagine that Australian budgetary support will be reduced or cut off completely. The Australian taxpayers can speak at the polls and political parties in Australia are acutely accountable to the voter so the riches in the mineral and petroleum sector may give the impression that we in PNG are making inroads. We bring the Australian people back to our earlier point that PNG needs to build its capacity.
Tagged: Anthony Albanese, British Solomon Isles, Fiji, French New Hebrides, James Marape, Vanuatu 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/connect-png-a-scam-oneill/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The government’s Connect PNG program has hit a huge pothole.Former prime minister Peter O’Neill has likened Connect PNG to a scam, which has sparked a public debate with Prime Minister James Marape, with his Works and Implementation Minister Solan Mirisim weighing in to support Mr Marape.Messrs O’Neill and Marape have traded barbs on the CPNG project, a K20 billion project to be funded over the next 20 years to essentially link up all the major centres in Papua New Guinea.Mr Marape has been particularly rattled by assertions by Mr O’Neill that a certain contractor allegedly allied to the Prime Minister has been showered with contracts amounting to K3.5 billion.
Mr Marape hit back straight away yesterday, attacking Mr O’Neill’s “shady” reputation when he was prime minister.Prime Minister Marape denied having shareholding as claimed by O’Neill.Instead he said: “Peter O’Neill was known for giving contracts to his own companies, and foreign companies, unlike now where we have over 300 local companies operating in all corners of our country.”While the two were at it, East Sepik Governor Allan Bird, a government backbencher, questioned the processes and procedures for the application of the project.He said the project seems to have breached the Constitution and that funding planned for one year appears to overlap into the following year’s budget.Mr Bird questioned the validity of the program in a long post on his social media account (see separate story).Yesterday, Mr O’Neill released a statement alleging the Connect PNG program as a scam and documents given to him by concerned public servants, revealed a staggering amount of money being paid allegedly to close associates of Mr Marape.He singled out an alleged K3.5 billion contract awarded to Ipwenz Construction, including other contracts to Amaku and Sons Construction Ltd; Construct Oceanic Ltd; CivPac and Albe Ltd.“Only a proper, independent audit will establish all the facts of what has gone on and continues to go on with the Connect PNG program.”Mr Marape hit back straight away, saying Mr O’Neill had “a far shadier and dishonest reputation” of awarding contracts to his own companies during his time as prime minister.He said Mr O’Neill should take a good look at himself before tainting the reputations of Papua New Guinea contractors.“When Peter O’Neill points a finger at PNG contractors, there are four more pointing back at him,” Prime Minister Marape said when rebutting accusations by Mr O’Neill.Ipwenz Construction owner Moses Palipe denied his company has seen any of the amounts suggested by Mr O’Neill.He said that the former Prime Minister and Member for Ialibu-Pangia has stooped too low to raise serious allegation against Ipwenz Construction Limited.Yesterday, at a press conference with Sinasina Yongomugl MP Kerenga Kua and other Opposition MPs, O’Neill continued his attack on Connect PNG.“Our nation’s financial stability is at stake right under the noses of the International Monetary Fund and other donors such as China and Australia. There is no way that anybody knows about what is going on,” O’Neill said.“I understand there is a lack of confidence that the Commissioner of Police or the Ombudsman Commission are free to do their work and public servants feel they have nowhere else to turn to bring light to these allegations of serious misappropriation.”Works Minister Solan Mirisim defended the program supporting Prime Minister Marape that “The recent media statement by former Prime Minister and Member for Ialibu-Pangia that a single national contractor has been awarded a K3.5 billion worth contract was ridiculous, misleading and very cunning and deceptive allegation raised at this juncture of VONC.”He said: “Papua New Guineans must not forget that Peter O’Neill is known for inflated contracts creating huge debt traps that our government is currently clearing. He must be ashamed of records of uncontrolled spending on creating highways to nowhere and forgetting the rural road access serving 85% of the rural population. To come and point fingers at the Marape Government for building local contractors is very hypocritical and deceptive.”
Tagged: Connect PNG program, James Marape, Peter O’Neill, Solan Mirisim 
Weak Governance and Corruption a contributing factor for transnational crimes 
Air Niugini bulks up on jet fuel supplies in POM, with regional supply still in limbo 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/land-and-maritime-project-enhances-climate-resilience-of-road-network-and-wharves-in-solomon-islands/

Land and maritime project enhances climate Resilience of road network and wharves in Solomon Islands - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
			Land and maritime project enhances climate Resilience of road network and wharves in Solomon Islands		
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
The Land and Maritime Connectivity Project that is supported by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) is delivering results and is already boosting land and maritime connectivity and strengthening the transport network in Solomon Islands.
In keeping with ADB’s role as Asia and the Pacific’s climate bank, Solomon Islands’ vulnerability to floods and cyclones has been considered in designing the roads and wharves to be developed by the project, contributing to the enhancement of the disaster resilience of the country’s transport network. 
The project will improve the east–west corridor of Guadalcanal, which passes through central Honiara. This stretch of road is a lifeline for local people and allows them to access essential services and pursue socioeconomic activities. 
Given the importance of maritime transport for the country’s economy, the project will also better the Honiara International Port and develop wharves in the provinces of Makira-Ulawa and Rennell and Bellona.
The rehabilitation works on the 5-kilometer section from Henderson Airport along the Mberande road were completed in 2023, and the ones on the Tandai Highway are expected to be completed within 2024. 
Work underway in Honiara, Guadalcanal and shows the installation of underground stormwater drainage pipes.Mberande Road, Honiara, preparatory work before asphalt surfacing.
Preparatory work is underway for the rehabilitation of Honiara’s International Port and the construction of wharves at Ahanga and Kira Kira.
“The Land and Maritime Connectivity Project will be transformational for the population in Solomon Islands, particularly those who live in rural areas and need regular access to economic opportunities and basic services for stable livelihoods,” said ADB Pacific Liaison and Coordination Office Regional Director Shane Rosenthal. 
“The project will help provide all-year access to such opportunities and services, as climate-resilient features that have been integrated into the design of the project roads and wharves.” 
“This project will reshape land and maritime infrastructure in Solomon Islands,” said Acting Permanent Secretary for Infrastructure Development Allan Lilia. “It is already delivering results, carrying out rehabilitation work along the Mberande Road and toward Tandai Highway, which composes the critical road link on the Guadalcanal Island.”
The capacity of the Ministry of Infrastructure Development will be strengthened by the project, through support in planning, project preparation, procurement, and other transport sector institutional reform. 
As part of the institutional strengthening, the project will help the Ministry of Infrastructure Development develop a gender strategy and provide capacity development training programs to female staff.
The project is funded by a concessional loan of $74.4 million and a grant of $74.5 million from the Asian Development Fund, which provides grants to ADB’s poorest and most vulnerable developing member countries. 
The Government of the Solomon Islands is contributing the remaining $21.8 million of the project’s overall cost of almost $171 million.
ADB is committed to achieving a prosperous, inclusive, resilient, and sustainable Asia and the Pacific, while sustaining its efforts to eradicate extreme poverty. Established in 1966, it is owned by 68 members—49 from the region.
Tagged: Land and Maritime Connectivity Project, Solomon Islands 
Weekend Warrior Ambulance Volunteer program by St Johns Ambulance and the National Department of Health 
Rising to meet the challenge of ambulance demand in Papua New Guinea 
NZ Govt a faithful partner in delivering Foreign Service Training 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

