https://www.postcourier.com.pg/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Ling-Stuckey Benched The predicted Cabinet reshuffle occurred yesterday with Treasurer Ian Ling-Stuckey becoming the bombshell victim.
Govt increase funding by K93.6 million The government tuition fees funding for this year has increased by K93.6 million, according to the Education Secretary Dr Uke Kombra.
Daki out, Dr Joseph in as Defence minister Social Democratic Party members were all smiles yesterday as Deputy Leader for SDP and Nipa-Kutubu MP Dr Billy Joseph was named as the new PNG Defence Force Minister.
Youths with no school and job, I will find you: Marape Youths between the ages of 15 and 30, who have dropped out of school or with no jobs, I want your names, says Prime Minister James Marape.
Women’s group Donate fresh garden foods to CPL THE Enga Enda Anda women’s group in Enga province is the first from outside of Port Moresby to come forward and donate fresh garden foods to CPL group of companies…
Asia and the Pacific swap places According to the World Health Organization, Universal Health Coverage (UHC) requires that all people receive the promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative health services they need and can afford.
Pirate attacks on rise in Morobe waters Pirate attacks in the coastal waters of Morobe and Popondetta are becoming a concern. In the past five years, there have been incidences of pirates taking control of boats ferrying…
Application for school fee subsidy program open Applications are open for the Eastern Highlands governor’s tuition fee subsidy assistant program.
Dragons miss out again St George Illawarra’s recruitment drive has hit another snag after the Canberra Raiders rejected a release request from hooker Zac Woolford to immediately move to the Dragons.
US in new strikes against Houthi  The United States military said on Wednesday its forces conducted strikes on 14 Houthi missiles that were loaded to be fired from Yemen, in the fourth day of US…
Grabbing US$300 billion of Russian assets is no solution, West cautions Western officials said in Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday that they were open to the idea of confiscating U$300 billion (K1.1 trillion) of Russian assets to help Ukraine, but cautioned that…
US Treasury official discusses cholera outbreak, debt with Zambia The United States Treasury Department’s top international official spoke with Zambia’s finance minister on Wednesday and discussed Zambia’s ongoing debt restructuring and its response to a recent cholera outbreak, the…
Guatemalan ex-president barred from entering US Former Guatemalan President Alejandro Giammattei has been barred from entering the US over allegations of “his  involvement in significant corruption,” the State Department said on Wednesday.
Raki a star in the making The inaugural Kewabi Epari, Ialibu-Pangia Unity Cup has certainly unearted many hidden talents.
Wabo puts best foot forward If there is one push factor for PNG Hunters backline utility Sanny Wabo to retain a spot in the team, it would be his eight-month-old daughter, Ariel Sanny.
Doc clears Morea Morea Junior Good news coming out from the South Pacific Brewery sponsored PNG Hunters side is the return of injured fullback Morea Morea Jr.
Athletics PNG 2024 calendar Athletics PNG has released its 2024 Calendar of events with its main overseas event for the year being the Oceania Championships in Suva , Fiji, from June 4 to 8.
One dead in Kainantu ONE person has died and several homes burned as fighting erupted between the Isontenu & Puanano villages and the enemy tribe from Yauna, 8 & 9mile in Kainantu district, Eastern…
Use restraint and common sense CENTRAL police commander, Chief Inspector Laimo Aisi has called on police officers within his command to be “positive and restore the intergrity of the Constabulary”.
State of Emergency does not include curfew ACTING Police Commissioner Donald Yamasombi says there is no curfew in the recently announced 14 day State of Emergency in Port Moresby.
Security company warns hooligans The Night Owl Security Service has warned the hooligans to be wary of their impulsive looting on innocent targets.
Convention to help students grow in faith in Kundiawa THE Catholic Diocese of Kundiawa, for the first time, hosted the tertiary students’ formation convention aimed at helping students progress in the Catholic faith.
Kumul partners with Site Group to expand skills training Kumul Petroleum Holdings Limited through its training entity, the Kumul Petroleum Academy (KPA) is expanding its training capacity by building a new training facility next door to its fabrication facility.
Sepik Basin LOs seek answers on Nopan project Sepik Basin landowners are appealing to the government to clarify the progress of a petroleum exploration project in the region.
400,000 people to be impacted, says CPL CEO Approximately 400,000 people in the community that depend on Stop and Shop shops for everyday essentials are now impacted with the looting and damage of these shops in the National…
PNG joins global trade coalition Minister for International Trade and Investment, Richard Maru, while participating at the 54th annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland, has announced Papua New Guinea’s membership to…
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/china-to-the-rescue-as-png-says-thanks-for-saving-five-adrift-in-solomon-islands-waters/

China to the rescue, as PNG says thanks for saving five adrift in Solomon Islands waters - Post Courier
					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
			China to the rescue, as PNG says thanks for saving five adrift in Solomon Islands waters		
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
On 26 February, LOMETO, a Marshall islands flag fishing vessel operated by Chinese company found a PNG boat that had lost power in Solomon Islands waters.
The boat carried six PNG citizens and had been drifting for 37 days. The Chinese fishing vessel rescued these people and provided necessary food and accommodation. Now the six PNG citizens are safe onboard and in good condition.
According to these PNG citizens, Bensly Kaskas is the owner of the boat and the other 5 people are passengers. They planned to travel from New Ireland to Bougainville, but due to bad weather the boat was carried far off course by the wind and waves and the engine soon ran out of fuel and the boat drifted further away.
When they were rescued, they had been drifting at sea for 37 days. They gradually ran out of food and water during the drifting and survived by catching rainwater and fishing.
Yesterday, in a statement released from the Foreign Affairs Minister Justin Tkatchenko acknowledged and thanked the people and Government of the Republic of China, for the rescue of six (6) Papua New Guinean fishermen who had been adrift.
“I thank the Chinese Ambassador His Excellency Zheng Fanhua, his staff, and the crew for efficiently communicating, ensuring and placing high consideration on the safety, well-being, and rescue assistance by the the Chinese shipping vessel crew, of PNG citizens,” Minister Tkachenko said. 
A formal diplomatic note conveyed by the Chinese Embassy to the Foreign Affairs Minister office confirmed on Monday February 27, that LOMETO has rescued them.
Minister Tkatchenko while also offering his thanks to the Chinese LOMETO crew, noted that closer PNG-China relations currently, had ensured efficient communications.
The Chinese fishing vessel rescued the fishermen, and provided necessary foods and accommodation.
The six(6) men are; Nason Koesana, Stanis Logan, Bensley Kaskas, Max Ben, Reynard Raoasok, and Liddy Kenehata, all from the Autonomous Region Of Bougainville
The Department of Foreign Affairs has delegated the appropriate section to assist in coordinating and contacting the relevant agencies to arrange for the return of the six fishermen to PNG.
Tagged: Bensly Kaskas, Foreign Affairs Minister Justin Tkatchenko 
Weak Governance and Corruption a contributing factor for transnational crimes 
Air Niugini bulks up on jet fuel supplies in POM, with regional supply still in limbo 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

