http://postcourier.com.pg

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Ling-Stuckey Benched The predicted Cabinet reshuffle occurred yesterday with Treasurer Ian Ling-Stuckey becoming the bombshell victim.
Govt increase funding by K93.6 million The government tuition fees funding for this year has increased by K93.6 million, according to the Education Secretary Dr Uke Kombra.
Daki out, Dr Joseph in as Defence minister Social Democratic Party members were all smiles yesterday as Deputy Leader for SDP and Nipa-Kutubu MP Dr Billy Joseph was named as the new PNG Defence Force Minister.
Youths with no school and job, I will find you: Marape Youths between the ages of 15 and 30, who have dropped out of school or with no jobs, I want your names, says Prime Minister James Marape.
Women’s group Donate fresh garden foods to CPL THE Enga Enda Anda women’s group in Enga province is the first from outside of Port Moresby to come forward and donate fresh garden foods to CPL group of companies…
Asia and the Pacific swap places According to the World Health Organization, Universal Health Coverage (UHC) requires that all people receive the promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative health services they need and can afford.
Pirate attacks on rise in Morobe waters Pirate attacks in the coastal waters of Morobe and Popondetta are becoming a concern. In the past five years, there have been incidences of pirates taking control of boats ferrying…
Application for school fee subsidy program open Applications are open for the Eastern Highlands governor’s tuition fee subsidy assistant program.
Dragons miss out again St George Illawarra’s recruitment drive has hit another snag after the Canberra Raiders rejected a release request from hooker Zac Woolford to immediately move to the Dragons.
US in new strikes against Houthi  The United States military said on Wednesday its forces conducted strikes on 14 Houthi missiles that were loaded to be fired from Yemen, in the fourth day of US…
Grabbing US$300 billion of Russian assets is no solution, West cautions Western officials said in Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday that they were open to the idea of confiscating U$300 billion (K1.1 trillion) of Russian assets to help Ukraine, but cautioned that…
US Treasury official discusses cholera outbreak, debt with Zambia The United States Treasury Department’s top international official spoke with Zambia’s finance minister on Wednesday and discussed Zambia’s ongoing debt restructuring and its response to a recent cholera outbreak, the…
Guatemalan ex-president barred from entering US Former Guatemalan President Alejandro Giammattei has been barred from entering the US over allegations of “his  involvement in significant corruption,” the State Department said on Wednesday.
Raki a star in the making The inaugural Kewabi Epari, Ialibu-Pangia Unity Cup has certainly unearted many hidden talents.
Wabo puts best foot forward If there is one push factor for PNG Hunters backline utility Sanny Wabo to retain a spot in the team, it would be his eight-month-old daughter, Ariel Sanny.
Doc clears Morea Morea Junior Good news coming out from the South Pacific Brewery sponsored PNG Hunters side is the return of injured fullback Morea Morea Jr.
Athletics PNG 2024 calendar Athletics PNG has released its 2024 Calendar of events with its main overseas event for the year being the Oceania Championships in Suva , Fiji, from June 4 to 8.
One dead in Kainantu ONE person has died and several homes burned as fighting erupted between the Isontenu & Puanano villages and the enemy tribe from Yauna, 8 & 9mile in Kainantu district, Eastern…
Use restraint and common sense CENTRAL police commander, Chief Inspector Laimo Aisi has called on police officers within his command to be “positive and restore the intergrity of the Constabulary”.
State of Emergency does not include curfew ACTING Police Commissioner Donald Yamasombi says there is no curfew in the recently announced 14 day State of Emergency in Port Moresby.
Security company warns hooligans The Night Owl Security Service has warned the hooligans to be wary of their impulsive looting on innocent targets.
Convention to help students grow in faith in Kundiawa THE Catholic Diocese of Kundiawa, for the first time, hosted the tertiary students’ formation convention aimed at helping students progress in the Catholic faith.
Kumul partners with Site Group to expand skills training Kumul Petroleum Holdings Limited through its training entity, the Kumul Petroleum Academy (KPA) is expanding its training capacity by building a new training facility next door to its fabrication facility.
Sepik Basin LOs seek answers on Nopan project Sepik Basin landowners are appealing to the government to clarify the progress of a petroleum exploration project in the region.
400,000 people to be impacted, says CPL CEO Approximately 400,000 people in the community that depend on Stop and Shop shops for everyday essentials are now impacted with the looting and damage of these shops in the National…
PNG joins global trade coalition Minister for International Trade and Investment, Richard Maru, while participating at the 54th annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland, has announced Papua New Guinea’s membership to…
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/boera-gets-solar-vaccine-fridge/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
BY MARK TALIAThe Boera aid post has received a solar vaccine fridge donated by NiuPower Limited.The fridge is to help with storing and giving out vaccination to the locals in the village, after seeing an increase in the number of Delta variant cased throughout the country.
NiuPower bought five solar vaccine fridges worth K270,000 to be distribbuted to the five villages along the Hiri West coast all the way to Kido, Papa, Lealea and Boera.These fridges will be solely used for storing vaccine and the company plans to distribute to Porebada village next month.Health worker Muka Sana from Baimuruin Gulf Province has been serving the people of Boera in the last 21 years as been struggling to make vaccine available for the people.
He has been going down to Konedobu Central provincial health office by PMV to pick up the vaccines with an esky in hand and back to the village.He is now a relieved man that the solar vaccine fridge has arrived to make work easy for him.“Thank you NiuPower, for my days of catching PMV to Konedobu will now cease.
From now on, we will just send word for the officers at the Central provincial health office to come by and drop them here for us to store them in the fridge for use,” said Mr Muka.NiuPower corporate affairs manager Wellington Belewa encouraged the staff to look after the fridge so that it can last longer and help with their other needs later on.“I hope you look after the fridge as it will in turn look after you and make work easy for your health worker. Mr Muka has been through one of our trainings and he will be able to use the vaccine fridge as required,”Mr Belewa said.Chairman Giva Daure on behalf of the community of Boera village thanked NiuPower for the timely assistance.“This is one of the things we really need in Boera Aid Post and we really appreciate the gesture.”
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/solar-vaccine-fridge-for-papa-lealea-villages/

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Share this:Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Telegram (Opens in new window)Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
BY MARK TALIANiuPower has donated two Solar vaccine fridge to the Salvation Army run clinic located in the village to serve the people of Papa Lealea along Hiri west as part of the company`s health support program.The company has also bought five solar vaccine fridges worth K270,000 that have been allocated to the five villages along the coast – Papa, Lealea, Porebada, Kido and Borea.
The donation will come with training health workers to cater for the solar vaccines fridge so that it is managed well and can last longer.This training will be conducted by the director of Mobo Pharmaceuticals Dr Simon Wiau
“Apart from purchasing this solar vaccine fridges NiuPower has also funded the second component that is the training and so will conduct a training in collaboration with the department of health form the 13th to the 17 of September here at the clinic to give a basic idea to the health workers on how to maintain the fridge and will have a long life span” said Dr Wiau.NiuPower Corporate Affairs Manager Wellington Belewa reiterated that the training was not only for health workers, however, included volunteers as well.
“The training is not only for the health workers but also for the volunteers as well because if the health workers are not available than they(volunteers) can administer the vaccine however as for snake bites the vials are also stored here so you can administer the patient rather waiting for the PMV to go to Port Moresby for treatment.”The fridges were handed over to the clinic by NiuPower Corporate Affairs Manager Wellington Belewa at a small but significant event help at Papa village yesterday.
Tagged: Borea, Dr Simon Wiau, Kido, Lealea, NiuPower, Papa, Papa Lealea, Porebada, Salvation Army, Wellington Belewa 
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

