https://www.postcourier.com.pg

					Papua New Guinea's 'trupla' leading Daily Newspaper Since 1969.The Post-Courier is proud of its record as the voice of PNG. We were there when the nation took its first bold steps towards independence. Since that time, we have fearlessly recorded the nation's progress.				
Ling-Stuckey Benched The predicted Cabinet reshuffle occurred yesterday with Treasurer Ian Ling-Stuckey becoming the bombshell victim.
Govt increase funding by K93.6 million The government tuition fees funding for this year has increased by K93.6 million, according to the Education Secretary Dr Uke Kombra.
Daki out, Dr Joseph in as Defence minister Social Democratic Party members were all smiles yesterday as Deputy Leader for SDP and Nipa-Kutubu MP Dr Billy Joseph was named as the new PNG Defence Force Minister.
Youths with no school and job, I will find you: Marape Youths between the ages of 15 and 30, who have dropped out of school or with no jobs, I want your names, says Prime Minister James Marape.
Asia and the Pacific swap places According to the World Health Organization, Universal Health Coverage (UHC) requires that all people receive the promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative, and palliative health services they need and can afford.
Pirate attacks on rise in Morobe waters Pirate attacks in the coastal waters of Morobe and Popondetta are becoming a concern. In the past five years, there have been incidences of pirates taking control of boats ferrying…
Application for school fee subsidy program open Applications are open for the Eastern Highlands governor’s tuition fee subsidy assistant program.
Eastern Highlands student selection based on academic performance The Eastern Highlands provincial education director Wesley Albert has assured that the grade nine and 11 students selection was based on their academic performances.
Dragons miss out again St George Illawarra’s recruitment drive has hit another snag after the Canberra Raiders rejected a release request from hooker Zac Woolford to immediately move to the Dragons.
US in new strikes against Houthi  The United States military said on Wednesday its forces conducted strikes on 14 Houthi missiles that were loaded to be fired from Yemen, in the fourth day of US…
Grabbing US$300 billion of Russian assets is no solution, West cautions Western officials said in Davos, Switzerland, on Wednesday that they were open to the idea of confiscating U$300 billion (K1.1 trillion) of Russian assets to help Ukraine, but cautioned that…
US Treasury official discusses cholera outbreak, debt with Zambia The United States Treasury Department’s top international official spoke with Zambia’s finance minister on Wednesday and discussed Zambia’s ongoing debt restructuring and its response to a recent cholera outbreak, the…
Guatemalan ex-president barred from entering US Former Guatemalan President Alejandro Giammattei has been barred from entering the US over allegations of “his  involvement in significant corruption,” the State Department said on Wednesday.
Raki a star in the making The inaugural Kewabi Epari, Ialibu-Pangia Unity Cup has certainly unearted many hidden talents.
Wabo puts best foot forward If there is one push factor for PNG Hunters backline utility Sanny Wabo to retain a spot in the team, it would be his eight-month-old daughter, Ariel Sanny.
Doc clears Morea Morea Junior Good news coming out from the South Pacific Brewery sponsored PNG Hunters side is the return of injured fullback Morea Morea Jr.
Athletics PNG 2024 calendar Athletics PNG has released its 2024 Calendar of events with its main overseas event for the year being the Oceania Championships in Suva , Fiji, from June 4 to 8.
One dead in Kainantu ONE person has died and several homes burned as fighting erupted between the Isontenu & Puanano villages and the enemy tribe from Yauna, 8 & 9mile in Kainantu district, Eastern…
Use restraint and common sense CENTRAL police commander, Chief Inspector Laimo Aisi has called on police officers within his command to be “positive and restore the intergrity of the Constabulary”.
State of Emergency does not include curfew ACTING Police Commissioner Donald Yamasombi says there is no curfew in the recently announced 14 day State of Emergency in Port Moresby.
Security company warns hooligans The Night Owl Security Service has warned the hooligans to be wary of their impulsive looting on innocent targets.
Convention to help students grow in faith in Kundiawa THE Catholic Diocese of Kundiawa, for the first time, hosted the tertiary students’ formation convention aimed at helping students progress in the Catholic faith.
Kumul partners with Site Group to expand skills training Kumul Petroleum Holdings Limited through its training entity, the Kumul Petroleum Academy (KPA) is expanding its training capacity by building a new training facility next door to its fabrication facility.
Sepik Basin LOs seek answers on Nopan project Sepik Basin landowners are appealing to the government to clarify the progress of a petroleum exploration project in the region.
400,000 people to be impacted, says CPL CEO Approximately 400,000 people in the community that depend on Stop and Shop shops for everyday essentials are now impacted with the looting and damage of these shops in the National…
PNG joins global trade coalition Minister for International Trade and Investment, Richard Maru, while participating at the 54th annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos-Klosters, Switzerland, has announced Papua New Guinea’s membership to…
Lawes Road, Konedobu, P.O Box 85, Port MoresbyPapua New Guinea 

--------------------------------------------------

https://www.postcourier.com.pg/solar-to-empower-sentral-llg/?share=linkedin

Sign inStay updated on your professional worldEmail or PhonePasswordshowForgot password?Sign inorBy clicking Continue, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy.Sign in with AppleSign in with a one-time linkSign in with a passkeyWe’ve emailed a one-time link to your primary email addressClick on the link to sign in instantly to your LinkedIn account.If you don't see the email in your inbox, check your spam folder.Resend emailBackNew to LinkedIn? Join nowAgree & Join LinkedInBy clicking Continue, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy.LinkedIn© 2024User AgreementPrivacy PolicyCommunity GuidelinesCookie PolicyCopyright PolicySend Feedbackالعربية (Arabic)Čeština (Czech)Dansk (Danish)Deutsch (German)English (English)Español (Spanish)Français (French)हिंदी (Hindi)Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian)Italiano (Italian)日本語 (Japanese)한국어 (Korean)Bahasa Malaysia (Malay)Nederlands (Dutch)Norsk (Norwegian)Polski (Polish)Português (Portuguese)Română (Romanian)Русский (Russian)Svenska (Swedish)ภาษาไทย (Thai)Tagalog (Tagalog)Türkçe (Turkish)Українська (Ukrainian)简体中文 (Chinese (Simplified))正體中文 (Chinese (Traditional))Language

--------------------------------------------------

